========,1,preface.
Ip Man, also known as Yip Man, (; 1 October 1893 – 2 December 1972), was a Chinese martial artist, and a master teacher of Wing Chun.
He had several students who later became martial arts masters in their own right.
His most famous student was Bruce Lee.
========,2,Early life.
Ip Man was born to Yip Oi-dor and Wu Shui.
He grew up in a wealthy family in Foshan, Guangdong, and received a traditional Chinese education.
His elder brother was Yip Kai-gak, his elder sister was Yip Wan-mei and his younger sister was Yip Wan-hum.
Ip started learning Wing Chun from Chan Wah-shun when he was 7.
Chan was 64 at the time, and Ip became Chan's last student.
Due to his teacher's age, Ip learned most of his skills and techniques from Chan's second eldest disciple, Wu Chung-sok (吳仲素).
Chan lived three years after Ip's training started and one of his dying wishes was to have Wu continue teaching Ip.
At the age of 16, Ip moved to Hong Kong with help from his relative Leung Fut-ting.
One year later, he attended school at St. Stephen's College—a secondary school for wealthy families and foreigners living in Hong Kong.
During Ip's time at St. Stephen's he saw a foreign police officer beating a woman and intervened.
The officer attempted to attack Ip, but Ip struck him down and ran to school with his classmate.
Ip's classmate later told an older man who lived in his apartment block.
The man met with Ip and asked what martial art Ip practised.
The man told Ip that his forms were "not too great".
The man challenged Ip's Wing Chun in chi sao (a form of training that involves controlled attack and defence).
Ip saw this as an opportunity to prove that his abilities were good, but was defeated by the man after a few strikes.
Ip's opponent revealed himself to be Leung Bik, Chan Wah-shun's senior and the son of Chan's teacher, Leung Jan. After that encounter, Ip continued learning from Leung Bik.
Ip returned to Foshan when he was 24 and became a policeman.
He taught Wing Chun to several of his subordinates, friends and relatives, but did not officially run a martial arts school.
Some of his best known informal students were Chow Kwong-yue (周光裕), Kwok Fu (郭富), Lun Kah (倫佳), Chan Chi-sun (陳志新), Xu He-Wei (徐和威) and Lui Ying (呂應).
Among them, Chow Kwong-yue was said to be the best, but he eventually went into commerce and stopped practising martial arts.
Kwok Fu and Lun Kah went on to teach students of their own and they passed down the art of Wing Chun in the Foshan and Guangdong region.
Chan Chi-sun and Lui Ying went to Hong Kong later but neither of them accepted any students.
Ip went to live with Kwok Fu during the Second Sino-Japanese War and only returned to Foshan after the war, where he continued his career as a police officer.
Ip left Foshan for Hong Kong at the end of 1949 after the Chinese Communist Party won the Chinese Civil War because he was an officer of the Kuomintang (Nationalist Party), the Communists' rival in the Civil War.
========,2,Life in Hong Kong.
Initially, Ip Man's teaching business was poor because Ip's students typically stayed for only a couple of months.
He moved his school twice: first to Castle Peak Road in Sham Shui Po and then to Lee Tat Street (利達街) in Yau Ma Tei.
By then, some of his students had attained proficiency in Wing Chun and were able to start their own schools.
Some of his students and descendants sparred with other martial artists to compare their skills and their victories helped increase Ip's fame.
In 1967, Ip and some of his students established the Ving Tsun Athletic Association (詠春體育會).
The main purpose of the Ving Tsun Athletic Association was to help Ip tackle his financial difficulties in Hong Kong.
Ip Man was said to have regularly used opium.
One of his former students, Duncan Leung, claimed that Ip used tuition money to support his opium addiction.
========,2,Death and legacy.
Ip died on December 2, 1972 in his unit at 149 Tung Choi Street in Hong Kong, from throat cancer, only 7 months before the death of Bruce Lee.
Ip's legacy is the global practice of Wing Chun.
Ip Chun, the eldest son of Ip Man, is as passionate and relentless in keeping his father's Wing Chun kung fu legacy alive and in 2014 Ip Chun was selected to represent Wing Chun as the inheritor of the legacy of Wing Chun-style kung fu.
Ip's notable students include: Leung Sheung, Lok Yiu, Chu Shong-tin, Wong Shun Leung, Bruce Lee, Moy Yat, Ho Kam Ming, Victor Kan, his nephew Lo Man Kam, and his sons Ip Ching and Ip Chun, and final student Leung Ting.
Ip also left behind a written history of Wing Chun.
Many artifacts of his life are on display in the "Yip Man Tong" museum in the Foshan Ancestral Temple grounds.
========,2,In popular culture.
"Ip Man", a Hong Kong film based on the life of Ip Man, starring Donnie Yen as the martial artist, was released in cinemas in 2008.
The film takes a number of liberties with Ip's life, often for dramatic effect.
Ip's eldest son Ip Chun appears in the film and served as a consultant on the production, which focuses on Ip's life during the 1930s to the 1940s during the Second Sino-Japanese War.
The film is the first to be based on the life of Ip.
The sequel "Ip Man 2" focuses on Ip's beginnings in Hong Kong and his students, including Bruce Lee.
Ip Man has taught many other people.
Amid a surge of Ip Man–related film projects in production, Donnie Yen told the Chinese media in March 2010 that after "Ip Man 2", he will no longer play the Wing Chun master.
He stated, "I would never ever touch any films related to Ip Man.
This will be my final film on the subject.
Whenever something becomes a success, everyone would jump on the bandwagon, this is very frightening.
Did you know how many Ip Man films are in production?
Under such condition, we would not progress, it'd only lead to over-saturation of the subject matter."
However a new film to the same series - "Ip Man 3" - was released on 24 December 2015 having Donnie Yen again starring as the grandmaster of Wing Chun-Ip Man.
Yu Chenghui played Ip Man in "The Legend of Bruce Lee", a 2008 Chinese television series based on the life story of Bruce Lee, who was one of Ip's students.
Another Hong Kong film based on Ip Man's life, called "The Legend Is Born – Ip Man", was released in June 2010.
Herman Yau directed the film and it starred Dennis To as Ip Man.
Ip Chun makes a special appearance in the film as Leung Bik.
Wong Kar-wai's "The Grandmaster" is a 2013 film starring Tony Leung as Ip Man.
The film concentrates more on the end of an era in Chinese martial arts history as the Second Sino-Japanese War broke out.
It was created in an almost biographical style, highlighting parts of history.
In contrast with the other Ip Man–related projects, "The Grandmaster" is a more reflective film, focusing more on the musings and philosophies between martial arts and life, as well as Ip Man's journey through the early 1930s to the early 1950s.
The 2013 Hong Kong film "", directed by Herman Yau and starring Anthony Wong as Ip Man, focuses on Ip's later life in Hong Kong.
Ip Chun makes a cameo appearance in the film.
This film also focuses on the loyalty of his pupils towards him.
The 2013 Chinese television series "Ip Man", based on Ip Man's life, was aired on the television network Astro On Demand between March and May 2013.
It was directed by Fan Xiaotian and starred Kevin Cheng as the eponymous character.
