========,1,preface.
Sheldon Rampton (born August 4, 1957) is an American editor and author.
He was editor of "PR Watch", and is the author of several books that criticize the public relations industry and what he sees as other forms of corporate and government propaganda.
========,2,Education.
Rampton was born in Long Beach, California.
At the age of three, his family moved to Las Vegas, Nevada, where his father worked as a musician.
Raised as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), he spent two years in Japan as a Latter-day Saint missionary from 1976 to 1978.
Upon returning to the United States, however, he left the LDS Church, influenced in part by Mormon feminist Sonia Johnson.
As an undergraduate student at Princeton University, Rampton studied writing under Joyce Carol Oates, E. L. Doctorow and John McPhee.
========,2,Career.
Upon graduation in 1982, Rampton worked as a newspaper reporter before becoming a peace activist.
During the 1980s and 1990s, he worked closely with the Wisconsin Coordinating Council on Nicaragua (WCCN), which opposed the Reagan administration's military interventions in Central America and works to promote economic development, human rights, and mutual friendship between the people of the United States and Nicaragua.
At WCCN, Rampton helped establish the Nicaraguan Credit Alternatives Fund (NICA Fund) in 1992, which channels loans from US investors to support microcredit and other "alternative credit" programs in Nicaragua.
In 1995, Rampton teamed with John Stauber as co-editors of PR Watch, a publication of the Center for Media and Democracy (CMD).
They were described as liberal, and their writings are regarded by some members of the public relations industry as one-sided and hostile.
ActivistCash, a website hosted by Washington lobbyist Richard Berman, has castigated them as "self-anointed watchdogs," "scare-mongers," "reckless" and "left-leaning."
Rampton and Stauber have in turn argued that the ActivistCash critique contains a number of "demonstrably false" claims.
Rampton is also a contributor to the Wikipedia open content project, and was the person who coined the name "Wikimedia" which later became the name of the foundation that manages Wikipedia and its sister projects.
Inspired by Wikipedia's collaborative writing model, Rampton founded Disinfopedia (now known as SourceWatch), another CMD project, to complement his PR Watch work to expose what Rampton perceives as deceptive and misleading public relations campaigns.
Rampton left the Center for Media and Democracy in October 2009.
