========,1,preface.
The Book of Revelation, often called the Revelation to John, the Apocalypse of John, The Revelation, or simply Revelation or Apocalypse, is a book of the New Testament that occupies a central place in Christian eschatology.
Its title is derived from the first word of the text, written in Koine Greek: "apokalypsis", meaning "unveiling" or "revelation" (before title pages and titles, books were commonly known by their first words, as is also the case of the Hebrew Five Books of Moses (Torah)).
The Book of Revelation is the only apocalyptic document in the New Testament canon (although there are short apocalyptic passages in various places in the Gospels and the Epistles).
The author names himself in the text as "John", but his precise identity remains a point of academic debate.
Second century Christian writers such as Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Melito the bishop of Sardis, and Clement of Alexandria and the author of the Muratorian fragment identify John the Apostle as the "John" of Revelation.
Modern scholarship generally takes a different view, and many consider that nothing can be known about the author except that he was a Christian prophet.
Some modern scholars characterise Revelation's author as a putative figure whom they call "John of Patmos".
The bulk of traditional sources date the book to the reign of the emperor Domitian (AD 81–96), and the evidence tends to confirm this.
The book spans three literary genres: the epistolary, the apocalyptic, and the prophetic.
It begins with John, on the island of Patmos in the Aegean, addressing a letter to the "Seven Churches of Asia".
He then describes a series of prophetic visions, including figures such as the Whore of Babylon and the Beast, culminating in the Second Coming of Jesus.
The obscure and extravagant imagery has led to a wide variety of Christian interpretations: historicist interpretations see in Revelation a broad view of history; preterist interpretations treat Revelation as mostly referring to the events of the apostolic era (1st century), or, at the latest, the fall of the Roman Empire; futurists believe that Revelation describes future events; and idealist or symbolic interpretations consider that Revelation does not refer to actual people or events, but is an allegory of the spiritual path and the ongoing struggle between good and evil.
========,2,Composition and setting.
========,3,Title, authorship, and date.
The title is taken from the first word of the book in Koine Greek: ἀποκάλυψις "apokalypsis", which means "unveiling" or "revelation".
The author names himself as "John", but it is currently considered unlikely that the author of Revelation was also the author of the Gospel of John.
Some of the evidence for this was set out as early as the second half of the 3rd century by Pope Dionysius of Alexandria, who noted that the gospel and the epistles attributed to John, unlike Revelation, do not name their author, and that the Greek of the gospel is correct and elegant while that of Revelation is neither; some later scholars believe that the two books also have radical differences in theological perspective.
Tradition links him to John the Apostle, but it is unlikely that the apostle could have lived into the most likely time for the book's composition, the reign of Domitian, and the author never states that he knew Jesus.
All that is known is that this John was a Jewish Christian prophet, probably belonging to a group of such prophets, and was accepted as such by the congregations to whom he addresses his letter.
His precise identity remains unknown, and modern scholarship commonly refers to him as John of Patmos.
Early Church tradition dates the book to end of the emperor Domitian (reigned AD 81–96), and most modern scholars agree, although the author may have written a first version under Vespasian (AD 69–79) and updated it under Domitian.
The beast with seven heads and the number 666 seem to allude directly to the emperor Nero (reigned AD 54-68), but this does not require that Revelation was written in the 60s, as there was a widespread belief in later decades that Nero would return.
In her volume in the original Anchor Bible, J. Massyngberde Ford argues that the core of Revelation, chapters 4-11, was written by John the Baptist and later surrounded with a Christian beginning and ending.
70 AD is the likely date of writing according to Martha Himmelfarb in the recently published Blackwell series.
========,3,Genre.
Revelation is an apocalyptic prophecy with an epistolary introduction addressed to seven churches in the Roman province of Asia.
"Apocalypse" means the revealing of divine mysteries; John is to write down what is revealed (what he sees in his vision) and send it to the seven churches.
The entire book constitutes the letter—the letters to the seven individual churches are introductions to the rest of the book, which is addressed to all seven.
While the dominant genre is apocalyptic, the author sees himself as a Christian prophet: Revelation uses the word in various forms twenty-one times, more than any other New Testament book.
========,3,Sources.
The predominant view is that Revelation alludes to the Old Testament although it is difficult among scholars to agree on the exact number of allusions or the allusions themselves.
Revelation rarely quotes directly from the Old Testament, almost every verse alludes to or echoes older scriptures.
Over half of the references stem from Daniel, Ezekiel, Psalms, and Isaiah, with Daniel providing the largest number in proportion to length and Ezekiel standing out as the most influential.
Because these references appear as allusions rather than as quotes, it is difficult to know whether the author used the Hebrew or the Greek version of the Hebrew scriptures, but he was clearly often influenced by the Greek.
He very frequently combines multiple references, and again the allusional style makes it impossible to be certain to what extent he did so consciously.
========,3,Setting.
Conventional understanding until recently was that Revelation was written to comfort beleaguered Christians as they underwent persecution at the hands of a megalomaniacal Roman emperor, but much of this has now been jettisoned: Domitian is no longer viewed as a despot imposing an imperial cult, and it is no longer believed that there was any systematic empire-wide persecution of Christians in his time.
The current view is that Revelation was composed in the context of a conflict within the Christian community of Asia Minor over whether to engage with, or withdraw from, the far larger non-Christian community: Revelation rejects those Christians who wanted to reach an accommodation with society.
This is not to say that Christians in Roman Asia were not suffering, for withdrawal from wider Roman society imposed very real penalties; Revelation offered an escape from this reality by offering an apocalyptic hope: in the words of professor Adela Yarbro Collins, "What ought to be was experienced as a present reality."
========,3,Canonical history.
Revelation was the last book accepted into the Christian biblical canon, and to the present day some "Nestorian" churches such as the Church of the East reject it.
It was considered tainted because the heretical sect of the Montanists relied on it and doubts were raised over its Jewishness and authorship.
Dionysius (248 AD), bishop of Alexandria, disciple of Origen wrote that the Book of Revelation could have been written by Cerinthus although he himself did not adopt the view that Cerinthus was the writer.
He regarded the Apocalypse as the work of an inspired man but not of an Apostle "(Eusebius, Church History VII.25)".
Eusebius, in his Church History (c. 330 AD) mentioned that the Apocalypse of John was accepted as a Canonical book and rejected at the same time:
The Apocalypse of John, also called Revelation, is counted as both accepted (Kirsopp.
Lake translation: "Recognized") and disputed, which has caused some confusion over what exactly Eusebius meant by doing so.
The disputation perhaps attributed to Origen.
Cyril of Jerusalem (348 AD) does not name it among the canonical books (Catechesis IV.33-36).
Athanasius (367 AD) listed the Book of Revelation as a Canonical book.
The monk Tyrannius Rufinus (c. 400 AD) named as a Canonical book the Revelation of John.
Pope Innocent I (405 AD) in a letter to the bishop of Toulouse listed as Canonical book the Book of Revelation.
John of Damascus (about 730) wrote in "An Exposition of the Orthodox Faith (Book IV:7)" that "the Revelation of John the Evangelist" was a canonical book.
========,3,Synods.
The Council of Laodicea (363) omits it as a canonical book.
The Synod of Hippo (in 393), followed by the Council of Carthage (397) and the Council of Carthage (419), classified it as a canonical book.
Augustine of Hippo (c. 397 AD) confirms in his book "On Christian Doctrine" (Book II, Chapter 8) its canonicity.
The "Decretum Gelasianum", which is a work written by an anonymous scholar between 519 and 553, contains a list of books of scripture presented as having been reckoned as canonical by the Council of Rome under Pope Damasus I (366-383).
This list mentions it as a part of the New Testament canon.
The Apostolic Canons, approved by the Eastern Orthodox Council in Trullo in 692, omit it.
========,3,Protestant Reformation.
Doubts resurfaced during the Protestant Reformation.
Martin Luther called it "neither apostolic nor prophetic" and it was the only New Testament book on which John Calvin did not write a commentary.
it remains the only New Testament work not read in the Divine Liturgy of the Eastern Orthodox Church, though Catholic and Protestant liturgies include it.
========,3,Texts and manuscripts.
There are approximately 300 Greek manuscripts of Revelation.
While the Codex Vaticanus does not include it, the other major manuscripts that do are the Codex Sinaiticus (4th century), Codex Alexandrinus (5th century), and Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus (5th century).
In addition, there are numerous papyri, especially that of "p" (3rd century); the minuscules (8th to 10th century), plus fragmentary quotations in the Church fathers of the 2nd to 5th centuries and the 6th century Greek commentary on Revelation by Andreas.
========,2,Structure and content.
========,3,Literary structure.
Divisions in the book seem to be marked by the repetition of key phrases, by the arrangement of subject matter into blocks, and around its Christological passages, and much use is made of significant numbers, especially the number seven, which represented perfection according to ancient numerology.
Nevertheless, there is a "complete lack of consensus" among scholars about the structure of Revelation.
The following is therefore an outline of the book's contents rather than of its structure.
========,2,Interpretations.
========,3,Eschatological.
========,4,Bahá'í Faith.
`Abdu'l-Bahá has given some interpretations about the 11th and 12th chapters of Revelation in "Some Answered Questions".
The 1,260 days spoken of in the forms: one thousand two hundred and sixty days, forty-two months, refers to the 1,260 years in the Islamic Calendar (AH 1260 or 1844 CE).
The "two witnesses" spoken of are Muhammad and Ali.
Also, the Bible reads, "And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; and behold a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads".
The seven heads of the dragon are symbolic of the seven provinces dominated by the Umayyads: Damascus, Persia, Arabia, Egypt, Africa, Andalusia, and Transoxania.
The ten horns represent the ten names of the leaders of the Umayyad dynasty: Abu Sufyan, Muawiya, Yazid, Marwan, Abd al-Malik, Walid, Sulayman, Umar, Hisham, and Ibrahim.
Some names were re-used, as in the case of Yazid II and Yazid III and the like, which were not counted for this interpretation.
========,4,Eastern Orthodox.
Eastern Orthodoxy treats the text as simultaneously describing contemporaneous events (events occurring at the same time) and as prophecy of events to come, for which the contemporaneous events were a form of foreshadow.
It rejects attempts to determine, before the fact, if the events of Revelation are occurring by mapping them onto present-day events, taking to heart the Scriptural warning against those who proclaim "He is here!"
Instead, the book is seen as a warning to be spiritually and morally ready for the end times, whenever they may come ("as a thief in the night"), but they will come at the time of God's choosing, not something that can be precipitated nor trivially deduced by mortals.
This view is also held by many Catholics, although there is a diversity of opinion about the nature of the Apocalypse within Catholicism.
Book of Revelation is the only book of the New Testament that is not read during services by the Byzantine Rite Churches although in the Western Rite Orthodox Parishes, which are under the same bishops as the Byzantine Rite, it is read.
========,4,Esoteric.
Christian Gnostics, however, are unlikely to be attracted to the teaching of Revelation because the doctrine of salvation through the sacrificed Lamb, which is central to Revelation, is repugnant to Gnostics.
Christian Gnostics "believed in the Forgiveness of Sins, but in no vicarious sacrifice for sin ... they accepted Christ in the full realisation of the word; his life, not his death, was the keynote of their doctrine and their practice."
James Morgan Pryse was an esoteric gnostic who saw Revelation as a western version of the Hindu theory of the Chakra.
He began his work, "The purpose of this book is to show that the Apocalypse is a manual of spiritual development and not, as conventionally interpreted, a cryptic history or prophecy."
Such diverse theories have failed to command widespread acceptance.
But Christopher Rowland argues: "there are always going to be loose threads which refuse to be woven into the fabric as a whole.
The presence of the threads which stubbornly refuse to be incorporated into the neat tapestry of our world-view does not usually totally undermine that view."
========,4,Latter-day Saints.
"Also known as the Apocalypse, a Greek word meaning revealed or uncovered.
The message of Revelation is the same as that of all scripture: there will be an eventual triumph on this earth of God over the devil; a permanent victory of good over evil, of the Saints over their persecutors, of the kingdom of God over the kingdoms of men and of Satan.
This is the subject on which Amos, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Paul, Peter, and all the prophets have written.
They spoke of a day of victory that would come, and that the end would be better (more glorious) than the beginning.
The victory would be achieved through Jesus Christ."
"Such is the theme of the Revelation.
The details about the beasts, the wars, the angels, the men, etc., contribute to the development of this theme.
By a little study, the theme can be perceived even if the details are not completely identified.
It may be in this sense that the Prophet Joseph Smith said that Revelation was 'one of the plainest books God ever caused to be written' (History of the Church 5:342).
However, the more fully the details are understood, the greater will be the appreciation of the theme.
If we fail to catch a glimpse of the theme, we fail in our comprehension, no matter how many details we are able to understand."
The Book of Mormon confirms that John the Apostle is the author of Revelation and that he was foreordained by God to write it.
Latter-day revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith contained in the Doctrine and Covenants, section 77, provides answers to specific questions regarding the symbolism contained in the Book of Revelation.
Topics include: the sea of glass, the four beasts and their appearance, the 24 elders, the book with seven seals, certain angels, the sealing of the 144,000, the little book eaten by John, and the two witnesses in Chapter 11.
Latter-day Saints believe that the warning contained in Revelation 22:18-19 does not refer to the biblical canon as a whole.
Rather, an open and ongoing dialogue between God and the modern-day Prophet and Apostles of the LDS faith constitute an open canon of scripture.
========,4,Paschal liturgical.
This interpretation, which has found expression among both Catholic and Protestant theologians, considers the liturgical worship, particularly the Easter rites, of early Christianity as background and context for understanding the Book of Revelation's structure and significance.
This perspective is explained in "The Paschal Liturgy and the Apocalypse" (new edition, 2004) by Massey H. Shepherd, an Episcopal scholar, and in Scott Hahn's "The Lamb's Supper: The Mass as Heaven on Earth" (1999), in which he states that Revelation in form is structured after creation, fall, judgment and redemption.
Those who hold this view say that the Temple's destruction (AD 70) had a profound effect on the Jewish people, not only in Jerusalem but among the Greek-speaking Jews of the Mediterranean.
They believe the Book of Revelation provides insight into the early Eucharist, saying that it is the new Temple worship in the New Heaven and Earth.
The idea of the Eucharist as a foretaste of the heavenly banquet is also explored by British Methodist Geoffrey Wainwright in his book "Eucharist and Eschatology" (Oxford University Press, 1980).
According to Pope Benedict XVI some of the images of Revelation should be understood in the context of the dramatic suffering and persecution of the churches of Asia in the 1st century.
Accordingly, the Book of Revelation should not be read as an enigmatic warning, but as an encouraging vision of Christ's definitive victory over evil.
========,4,Radical discipleship.
The radical discipleship interpretation asserts that the Book of Revelation is best understood as a handbook for radical discipleship; i. e., how to remain faithful to the spirit and teachings of Jesus and avoid simply assimilating to surrounding society.
In this interpretation the primary agenda of the book is to expose as impostors the worldly powers that seek to oppose the ways of God and God's Kingdom.
The chief temptation for Christians in the 1st century, and today, is to fail to hold fast to the non-violent teachings and example of Jesus and instead be lured into unquestioning adoption and assimilation of worldly, national or cultural values – imperialism, nationalism, and civil religion being the most dangerous and insidious.
This perspective (closely related to liberation theology) draws on the approach of Bible scholars such as Ched Myers, William Stringfellow, Richard Horsley, Daniel Berrigan, Wes Howard-Brook, and Joerg Rieger.
Various Christian anarchists, such as Jacques Ellul, have identified the State and political power as the Beast.
========,4,Seventh-day Adventist.
Adventists maintain a historicist interpretation of the Bible's predictions of the apocalypse.
Seventh-day Adventists believe the Book of Revelation is especially relevant to believers in the days preceding the second coming of Jesus Christ.
"The universal church is composed of all who truly believe in Christ, but in the last days, a time of widespread apostasy, a remnant has been called out to keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus."
"Here is the patience of the saints; here are those who keep the commandments of God and the faith of Jesus."
As participatory agents in the work of salvation for all humankind, "This remnant announces the arrival of the judgment hour, proclaims salvation through Christ, and heralds the approach of His second advent."
========,3,Aesthetic and literary.
Many literary writers and theorists have contributed to a wide range of theories about the origins and purpose of the Book of Revelation.
Some of these writers have no connection with established Christian faiths but, nevertheless, found in Revelation a source of inspiration.
Revelation has been approached from Hindu philosophy and Jewish Midrash.
Others have pointed to aspects of composition which have been ignored such as the similarities of prophetic inspiration to modern poetic inspiration, or the parallels with Greek drama.
In recent years, theories have arisen which concentrate upon how readers and texts interact to create meaning and which are less interested in what the original author intended.
Charles Cutler Torrey taught Semitic languages at Yale University.
His lasting contribution has been to show how much more meaningful prophets, such as the scribe of Revelation, are when treated as poets first and foremost.
He thought this was a point often lost sight of because most English bibles render everything in prose.
Poetry was also the reason John never directly quoted the older prophets.
Had he done so, he would have had to use their (Hebrew) poetry whereas he wanted to write his own.
Torrey insisted Revelation had originally been written in Aramaic.
This was why the surviving Greek translation was written in such a strange idiom.
It was a literal translation that had to comply with the warning at Revelation 22:18 that the text must not be corrupted in any way.
According to Torrey, the story is that "The Fourth Gospel was brought to Ephesus by a Christian fugitive from Palestine soon after the middle of the first century.
It was written in Aramaic."
Later, the Ephesians claimed this fugitive had actually been the beloved disciple himself.
Subsequently, this John was banished by Nero and died on Patmos after writing Revelation.
Torrey argued that until AD 80, when Christians were expelled from the synagogues, the Christian message was always first heard in the synagogue and, for cultural reasons, the evangelist would have spoken in Aramaic, else "he would have had no hearing."
Torrey showed how the three major songs in Revelation (the new song, the song of Moses and the Lamb and the chorus at 19: 6–8) each fall naturally into four regular metrical lines plus a coda.
Other dramatic moments in Revelation, such as 6:16 where the terrified people cry out to be hidden, behave in a similar way.
Christina Rossetti was a Victorian poet who believed the sensual excitement of the natural world found its meaningful purpose in death and in God.
Her "The Face of the Deep" is a meditation upon the Apocalypse.
In her view, what Revelation has to teach is patience.
Patience is the closest to perfection the human condition allows.
Her book, which is largely written in prose, frequently breaks into poetry or jubilation, much like Revelation itself.
The relevance of John's visions belongs to Christians of all times as a continuous present meditation.
Such matters are eternal and outside of normal human reckoning.
"That winter which will be the death of Time has no promise of termination.
Winter that returns not to spring ... – who can bear it?"
She dealt deftly with the vengeful aspects of John's message.
"A few are charged to do judgment; everyone without exception is charged to show mercy."
Her conclusion is that Christians should see John as "representative of all his brethren" so they should "hope as he hoped, love as he loved."
Recently, aesthetic and literary modes of interpretation have developed, which focus on Revelation as a work of art and imagination, viewing the imagery as symbolic depictions of timeless truths and the victory of good over evil.
Elisabeth Schüssler Fiorenza wrote "Revelation: Vision of a Just World" from the viewpoint of rhetoric.
Accordingly, Revelation's meaning is partially determined by the way John goes about saying things, partially by the context in which readers receive the message and partially by its appeal to something beyond logic.
Professor Schuessler Fiorenza believes that Revelation has particular relevance today as a liberating message to disadvantaged groups.
John's book is a vision of a just world, not a vengeful threat of world-destruction.
Her view that Revelation's message is not gender-based has caused dissent.
She says we are to look behind the symbols rather than make a fetish out of them.
In contrast, Tina Pippin states that John writes "horror literature" and "the misogyny which underlies the narrative is extreme."
D. H. Lawrence took an opposing, pessimistic view of Revelation in the final book he wrote, "Apocalypse".
He saw the language which Revelation used as being bleak and destructive; a 'death-product'.
Instead, he wanted to champion a public-spirited individualism (which he identified with the historical Jesus supplemented by an ill-defined cosmic consciousness) against its two natural enemies.
One of these he called "the sovereignty of the intellect" which he saw in a technology-based totalitarian society.
The other enemy he styled "vulgarity" and that was what he found in Revelation.
"It is very nice if you are poor and not humble ... to bring your enemies down to utter destruction, while you yourself rise up to grandeur.
And nowhere does this happen so splendiferously than in Revelation."
His specific aesthetic objections to Revelation were that its imagery was unnatural and that phrases like "the wrath of the Lamb" were "ridiculous."
He saw Revelation as comprising two discordant halves.
In the first, there was a scheme of cosmic renewal in "great Chaldean sky-spaces", which he quite liked.
After that, Lawrence thought, the book became preoccupied with the birth of the baby messiah and "flamboyant hate and simple lust ... for the end of the world."
Lawrence coined the term "Patmossers" to describe those Christians who could only be happy in paradise if they knew their enemies were suffering in hell.
========,3,Academic.
Modern biblical scholarship attempts to understand Revelation in its 1st century historical context within the genre of Jewish and Christian apocalyptic literature.
This approach considers the text as an address to seven historical communities in Asia Minor.
Under this interpretation, assertions that "the time is near" are to be taken literally by those communities.
Consequently, the work is viewed as a warning to not conform to contemporary Greco-Roman society which John "unveils" as beastly, demonic, and subject to divine judgment.
There is further information on these topics in the entries on higher criticism and apocalyptic literature.
Although the acceptance of Revelation into the canon has from the beginning been controversial, it has been essentially similar to the career of other texts.
The eventual exclusion of other contemporary apocalyptic literature from the canon may throw light on the unfolding historical processes of what was officially considered orthodox, what was heterodox, and what was even heretical.
Interpretation of meanings and imagery are anchored in what the historical author intended and what his contemporary audience inferred; a message to Christians not to assimilate into the Roman imperial culture was John's central message.
Thus, his letter (written in the apocalyptic genre) is pastoral in nature (its purpose is offering hope to the downtrodden), and the symbolism of Revelation is to be understood entirely within its historical, literary, and social context.
Critics study the conventions of apocalyptic literature and events of the 1st century to make sense of what the author may have intended.
========,2,Old Testament origins.
Much of Revelation employs ancient sources, primarily but not exclusively the Old Testament.
For example, Howard-Brook and Gwyther regard the Book of Enoch (1 Enoch) as an equally significant but contextually different source.
"Enoch's journey has no close parallel in the Hebrew scriptures."
Revelation, in one section, forms an inverted parallel (chiasmus) with the book of Enoch in which 1 En 100:1-3 has a river of blood deep enough to submerge a chariot and in Rev 14:20 has a river of blood up to the horse's bridle.
There is an angel ascending in both accounts (1 En 100:4; Rev 14:14-19) and both accounts have three messages (1 En 100:7-9; Rev 14:6-12).
Academics showed little interest in this topic until recently.
This was not, however, the case with popular writers from non-conforming backgrounds, who interspersed the text of Revelation with the prophecy they thought was being promised.
For example, an anonymous Scottish commentary of 1871 prefaces Revelation 4 with the Little Apocalypse of Mark 13, places Malachi 4:5 ("Behold I will send you Elijah the prophet before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord") within Revelation 11 and writes Revelation 12:7 side-by-side with the role of "the Satan" in the Book of Job.
The message is that everything in Revelation will happen in its previously appointed time.
Steve Moyise uses the index of the United Bible Societies' Greek New Testament to show that "Revelation contains more Old Testament allusions than any other New Testament book, but it does not record a single quotation."
Perhaps significantly, Revelation chooses different sources than other New Testament books.
Revelation concentrates on Isaiah, Psalms, and Ezekiel, while neglecting, comparatively speaking, the books of the Pentateuch that are the dominant sources for other New Testament writers.
Methodological objections have been made to this course as each allusion may not have an equal significance.
To counter this, G. K. Beale sought to develop a system that distinguished 'clear', 'probable', and 'possible' allusions.
A clear allusion is one with almost the same wording as its source, the same general meaning, and which could not reasonably have been drawn from elsewhere.
A probable allusion contains an idea which is uniquely traceable to its source.
Possible allusions are described as mere echoes of their putative sources.
Yet, with Revelation, the problems might be judged more fundamental.
The author seems to be using his sources in a completely different way to the originals.
For example, he borrows the 'new temple' imagery of Ezekiel 40–48 but uses it to describe a New Jerusalem which, quite pointedly, no longer needs a temple because it is God's dwelling.
Ian Boxall writes that Revelation "is no montage of biblical quotations (that is not John's way) but a wealth of allusions and evocations rewoven into something new and creative."
In trying to identify this "something new", Boxall argues that Ezekiel provides the 'backbone' for Revelation.
He sets out a comparative table listing the chapters of Revelation in sequence and linking most of them to the structurally corresponding chapter in Ezekiel.
The interesting point is that the order is not the same.
John, on this theory, rearranges Ezekiel to suit his own purposes.
Some commentators argue that it is these purposes – and not the structure – that really matter.
G. K. Beale believes that, however much John makes use of Ezekiel, his ultimate purpose is to present Revelation as a fulfillment of Daniel 7.
One theory, Revelation Draft Hypothesis, sees the book of Revelation constructed by forming parallels with several texts in the Old Testament such as Ezekiel, Isaiah, Zechariah, Deuteronomy, Joshua, Exodus, and Daniel.
For example, Ezekiel's encounter with God is in reverse order as John's encounter with God (Ezek 1:5-28; Rev 4:2-7; note both accounts have beings with faces of a lion, ox or calf, man, and eagle (Ezek 1:10; Rev 4:7), both accounts have an expanse before the throne (Ezek 1:22; Rev 4:6).
The chariot's horses in Zechariah's are the same colors as the four horses in Revelation (Zech 6:1-8; Rev 6:1-8).
The nesting of the seven marches around Jericho by Joshua is reenacted by Jesus nesting the seven trumpets within the seventh seal (Josh 6:8-10; Rev 6:1-17; 8:1-9:21; 11:15-19).
The description of the beast in Revelation is taken directly out of Daniel (see Dan 7:2-8; Rev 13:1-7).
The method that John used allowed him to use the Hebrew Scriptures as the source and also use basic techniques of parallel formation, thereby alluding to the Hebrew Scriptures.
