========,1,preface.
Thomas Carlyle "Tom" Ford (born August 27, 1961) is an American fashion designer, film director, screenwriter, and film producer and was the creative director at Gucci and Yves Saint Laurent.
In 2006, Ford launched his own "Tom Ford" label.
Ford directed the films "A Single Man" (2009) and "Nocturnal Animals" (2016), which were Oscar-nominated.
========,2,Early life.
Tom Ford was born on August 27, 1961, in Austin, Texas, the son of realtors Shirley Burton (née Shirley Ann Thrasher) and Thomas David Ford.
He spent his early life in the suburbs of Houston, Texas, and in San Marcos, outside Austin; his family moved to Santa Fe, New Mexico, when he was 11.
In Santa Fe, he entered St. Michael's High School and later moved to Santa Fe Preparatory School, from which he graduated in 1979.
At age 16, he enrolled at Bard College at Simon's Rock, but quickly dropped out.
He moved to New York City to study art history at New York University (NYU).
Ford dropped out of NYU after a year, focusing on acting in television commercials.
Ford began studying interior architecture at The New School's art and design college, Parsons The New School for Design.
While in New York, he often visited Studio 54, where he realized he was gay.
The club's disco-era glamor would be a major influence on his later designs.
Before his last year at New School, Ford spent a year and a half in Paris, where he worked as an intern in Chloé's press office, inspiring his interest in fashion.
He spent his final year at The New School studying fashion, but graduated with a degree in architecture.
========,2,Fashion career.
========,3,Early career.
When interviewing for jobs after graduation, Ford said that he had attended The New School's Parsons division, but concealed that he graduated in architecture, and that his work at Chloé was a low-level public relations position.
Despite his lack of experience in fashion, Ford called American designer Cathy Hardwick every day for a month in hopes of securing a job at her sportswear company.
Hardwick eventually agreed to interview him.
She later recalled the incident: "I had every intention of giving him no hope.
I asked him who his favorite European designers were.
He said, 'Armani and Chanel.'
Months later I asked him why he said that, and he said, 'Because you were wearing something Armani'.
Is it any wonder he got the job?"
Ford worked as a design assistant for Hardwick for two years.
In 1988, Ford moved to Perry Ellis, where he knew both Robert McDonald, the company's president, and Marc Jacobs, its designer, socially.
He worked at the company for two years, but grew tired of working in American fashion.
In a later interview with "The New York Times", he commented, "If I was ever going to become a good designer, I had to leave America.
My own culture was inhibiting me.
Too much style in America is tacky.
It's looked down upon to be too stylish.
Europeans, however, appreciate style."
At the time, Italian fashion house Gucci was struggling financially and was seeking to strengthen its women's ready-to-wear presence as a part of a brand overhaul.
The company's creative director, Dawn Mello said, "no one would dream of wearing Gucci".
In 1990, Mello hired Ford as the brand's chief women's ready-to-wear designer and Ford moved to Milan.
"I was talking to a lot of people, and most didn't want the job," Mello said.
"For an American designer to move to Italy to join a company that was far from being a brand would have been pretty risky."
Ford and his longtime partner, fashion journalist Richard Buckley, relocated to Milan that September.
Ford's role at Gucci rapidly expanded; he was designing menswear within six months, and shoes soon after that.
When Richard Lambertson left as design director in 1992, Ford took over his position, heading the brand's ready-to-wear, fragrances, image, advertising, and store design.
In 1993, when he was in charge of designing eleven product lines, Ford worked eighteen-hour days.
During these years, there were creative tensions between Ford and Maurizio Gucci, the company's chairman and 50% owner.
According to Mello, "Maurizio always wanted everything to be round and brown, and Tom wanted to make it square and black."
Though Maurizio Gucci wanted to fire Ford, Domenico De Sole insisted that he remain.
Nonetheless, Ford's work during the early 1990s was primarily behind the scenes; his contributions to Gucci were overshadowed by those of Mello, who was the company's public face.
========,3,Creative director of Gucci and Saint Laurent.
In 1994, Ford was promoted to Creative Director of Gucci.
In his first year at the helm, he introduced Halston-style velvet hipsters, skinny satin shirts and car-finish metallic patent boots.
In 1995, he brought in French stylist Carine Roitfeld and photographer Mario Testino to create a series of new ad campaigns for the company.
Between 1995 and 1996, sales at Gucci increased by 90%.
At one point, Ford was the largest individual shareholder of Gucci stock and options.
By 1999, the house, which had been almost bankrupt when Ford joined, was valued more than $4 billion.
When Gucci acquired the house of Yves Saint Laurent (YSL) in 1999, Ford was named Creative Director of that label as well.
Saint Laurent did not hide his displeasure with Ford's designs, stating "The poor man does what he can".
During his time as creative director for YSL, Ford nonetheless won numerous Council of Fashion Designers of America Awards.
Like his work at Gucci, Ford was able to pull the classic fashion house back into the mainstream.
His advertising campaigns for the YSL fragrances Opium (with a red-haired Sophie Dahl completely naked wearing only a necklace and stiletto heels in a sexually suggestive pose) and YSL M7 (with martial arts champion Samuel de Cubber in complete full-frontal nudity) were controversial and provocative.
In April 2004, Ford parted ways with the Gucci group after he and CEO Domenico de Sole, who is credited as Ford's partner in Gucci's success, failed to agree with Pinault Printemps Redoute boss over control of the Group.
He has since referred to this experience as "devastating" and as a "midlife crisis" because he had "put everything into that for fifteen years."
When Ford left in 2004, Gucci Group was valued at $10 billion.
Four people were hired to split the work Ford had done.
========,3,Tom Ford label.
After leaving Gucci, Ford launched a line of menswear, beauty, eyewear, and accessories in 2006, named after himself, "Tom Ford".
Dominico De Sole became chairman of the Tom Ford label.
Ford has described "the Tom Ford customer" as international, cultured, well traveled, and possessing disposable income.
For females, he added "strong women, … intelligent women who know their own style".
Michelle Obama wore an ivory floor-length evening gown designed by Ford to Buckingham Palace in 2011.
Ford has also dressed Beyoncé, Jennifer Lopez, Gwyneth Paltrow, Anne Hathaway, Daniel Craig, Tom Hanks, Johnny Depp, Ryan Gosling, Will Smith, Julianne Moore, Hugh Jackman, Jon Hamm, and Henry Cavill.
Ford designed Daniel Craig's suits for his last three James Bond films: "Quantum of Solace", "Skyfall", and "Spectre".
In 2013, Tom Ford was mentioned in Justin Timberlake's song "Suit & Tie", which was a collaboration with Jay Z. Ford created the suits, shirts, and accessories for the Grammy winning "Suit & Tie" music video.
He went on to dress Timberlake's 20/20 Experience World Tour, designing over 600 pieces for the tour.
The same year, Jay Z released a song titled "Tom Ford" with "Tom Ford" rapped numerous times within the song.
Ford responded that he was flattered and "it means that one has really penetrated and made an impact on popular culture."
Following the song's release, Tom Ford received a huge spike in online search engine queries.
The song would go on to sell over a million copies and become certified platinum.
========,3,Controversies.
Ford has been criticized for using naked women in various ad campaigns.
Various journalists asserted that the ads were vulgar, sexist, or objectified women.
One ad featuring a nude woman holding a bottle of the perfume between her legs.
Another featured a naked woman ironing a man's pants while he read a newspaper.
A separate ad was banned in Italy.
Responding to criticism that he objectified women, Ford stated he is an "equal opportunity objectifier" and is "just as happy to objectify men".
He argued "you can't show male nudity in our culture in the way you can show female nudity" and pointed out that he did a male nude ad while at Yves Saint Laurent which got pulled.
In 2014, Ford released a new product, called the "Penis Pendant Necklace".
The product caused some controversy, with Christians calling it offensive due to the pendant being shaped similar to a Christian cross or crucifix.
Ford replied that "it was not meant to be a cross, it was a phallus" and "people read into things that they want to".
========,2,Career as a film director.
========,3,"A Single Man".
In March 2005, Ford announced the launch of his film production company, Fade to Black.
In 2009 he made his directorial debut with "A Single Man", based on the novel of the same name by Christopher Isherwood.
The drama stars Colin Firth as an LA-based, gay college professor, alongside Julianne Moore, Nicholas Hoult and Matthew Goode.
The screenplay was adapted by Canadian David Scearce and Ford; Ford was also one of the producers.
"A Single Man" premiered on September 11, 2009 at the 66th Venice International Film Festival, where it was nominated for top award the Golden Lion.
Colin Firth was awarded the Volpi Cup as Best Actor for his performance.
He won a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, and was nominated for an Academy Award, Golden Globe, Independent Spirit Award and Screen Actors Guild Award.
Other nominations for the film included two further Golden Globe categories: Julianne Moore for Best Supporting Actress, and Abel Korzeniowski for Best Original Score.
At the Independent Spirit Awards, the film was nominated for Best First Feature and Best First Screenplay.
Ford and David Scearce, who had first adapted the book into a novel, also received a nomination for Best Adapted Screenplay at the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards.
========,3,"Nocturnal Animals".
In 2015, Ford became attached to direct "Nocturnal Animals", an adaptation of the Austin Wright novel "Tony and Susan".
The film was released in 2016.
Jake Gyllenhaal and Amy Adams played the lead roles of Tony and Susan, and Michael Shannon, Armie Hammer, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, and Isla Fisher co-starred.
The film received praise from critics, as well as winning the Grand Jury Prize at the Venice Film Festival.
The film has an approval rating of 72% on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 143 reviews, with an average rating of 7.1/10, and the site's critical consensus reading: "Well-acted and lovely to look at, "Nocturnal Animals" further underscores writer-director Tom Ford's distinctive visual and narrative skill."
========,2,Personal life.
Ford is married to Richard Buckley, a journalist and former editor in chief of "Vogue Hommes International"; they have been in a relationship since meeting in 1986.
The couple have a son, Alexander John "Jack" Buckley Ford, born in September 2012.
The family lived in Italy, where Ford moved from New York in 1990.
Ford lives in his residences in Los Angeles, Santa Fe, and London.
Ford and Buckley have owned smooth fox terriers, which have appeared on the runway and in his film "A Single Man".
He constructed a 24,000-acre private tract designed by Japanese architect Tadao Ando, in Santa Fe.
========,3,Politics.
Ford is a Democrat.
He disagreed with America's invasion of Iraq in 2003, stating that he felt "ashamed to be an American".
His comment drew public criticism within America.
Ford hosted a fundraiser for Obama.
Ford has advocated for federal recognition of same-sex marriage in the United States.
In an 2009 interview, he said he preferred the term "civil partnership" for both opposite-sex and same-sex partnerships, and to leave "marriage" to religion to decide.
========,2,Public image and legacy.
Ford has been included in several best-dressed lists, such as International Best Dressed List, "The Guardian"s "The 50 best-dressed over-50s", and "British GQ"s "50 Best Dressed Men in Britain 2015".
He was featured on the cover of the 2011 spring/summer issue of "Another Man", giving his opinion on what makes the modern day gentleman.
He has been called a "fashion icon" and a "style icon", and he was included in "All-"TIME" 100 Fashion Icons" list.
He won many awards including several VH1/Vogue Fashion Awards and Council of Fashion Designers of America (CFDA) Awards.
In 2014, the CFDA awarded him the Geoffery Beene Lifetime Achievement Award.
While Ford has been in a monogamous relationship for many years, he "continues to promote himself with a youthful and sexually charged image."
He is known for sexy clothes, making provocative statements, and creating racy advertisements.
Ford's designs convey a "sophisticated sex appeal" and he has been credited for "bringing sexy back".
His advertisement campaigns have drawn controversy for use of nudity and "provocative sexual imagery".
Ford is also known to pose with celebrities and models in his ad campaigns.
He has been called the "King of Sex" and "the straightest gay man in the world".
Ford saved Gucci from near bankruptcy and transformed it into a fashion powerhouse.
His decade as the creative director was a "golden era" for Gucci.
He turned the brand around, replacing the "grunge look" with "sexy, yet sophisticated, clothes".
He is known for his bold designs.
The "New York Magazine" wrote "Every season, Ford created an 'It' piece, a must-have, a season-defining trend, photographed to death, knocked off ad nauseam."
Ford says it is important for designers to be contemporary and current with the changing standard of beauty.
