========,1,preface.
The Tripartite Pact, also known as the Berlin Pact, was an agreement between Germany, Japan and Italy signed in Berlin on 27 September 1940 by, respectively, Joachim von Ribbentrop, Saburō Kurusu and Galeazzo Ciano.
It was a defensive military alliance that was eventually joined by Hungary (20 November 1940), Romania (23 November 1940), Bulgaria (1 March 1941) and Yugoslavia (25 March 1941), as well as by the German client state of Slovakia (24 November 1940).
Yugoslavia's adherence provoked a "coup d'état" in Belgrade, and Italy and Germany responded by invading Yugoslavia (with Bulgarian, Hungarian and Romanian assistance) and partitioning the country.
The resulting Italo-German client state of Croatia joined the pact on 15 June 1941.
The Tripartite Pact was directed primarily at the United States.
Its practical effects were limited, since the Italo-German and Japanese operational theatres were on opposite sides of the world and the high contracting powers had disparate strategic interests.
Some technical cooperation was carried out, and the Japanese declaration of war on the United States propelled, although it did not require, a similar declaration of war from all the other signatories of the Tripartite Pact.
========,2,Later signatories.
In a ceremonial speech following the signing of the pact on 27 September, Ribbentrop may have suggested that the signatories were open to accepting new signatories in the future.
The "Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung" (DAZ) reported his words as follows:
The purpose of the Pact is, above all things, to help restore peace to the world as quickly as possible.
Therefore any other State which wishes to adhere to this bloc ("der diesem Block beitreten will"), with the intention of contributing to the restoration of peaceful conditions, will be sincerely and gratefully made welcome and will participate in the economic and political reorganisation.
The official "Deutsches Nachrichtenbüro" (DNB), however, as well as most of the press, reported a slightly different version, in which the words "behave towards" ("gegenüber tritt") replace "adhere to".
It is likely that initially the adherence of other nations was not envisaged, and that Ribbentrop misspoke.
The official record in the DNB therefore corrected his words to remove any reference to "adherence" by other states, but produced an awkward wording in the process.
The Italian foreign minister, Ciano, was resolutely opposed to the idea of adding smaller states to the pact as late as 20 November 1940, arguing in his diary that they weakened the pact and were useless bits of diplomacy.
========,3,Hungary.
The Kingdom of Hungary was the fourth state to sign the pact and the first to adhere to it after 27 September 1940.
The Hungarian ambassador in Berlin, Döme Sztójay, telegraphed his foreign minister, István Csáky, immediately after news of the signing and of Ribbentrop's speech had reached him.
He urged Csáky to adhere to the pact, even claiming that it was the expectation of Germany and Italy that she would do so.
He considered it especially important that Hungary sign the pact before Romania did.
In response, Csáky asked Sztójay and the ambassador in Rome, Frigyes Villani, to make enquiries regarding Hungary's adherence and its potential obligations under the pact.
On September 28, the German secretary of state for foreign affairs, Ernst von Weizsäcker, informed Hungary that Ribbentrop had meant not a "formal adherence" but merely "an attitude in the spirit of the Pact".
The Italian answer was similar.
Nonetheless, within the week the Hungarian government had sent out formal notice of its "spiritual adherence" to the pact.
In the week after Hungary's "spiritual" adherence, the Balkan situation changed.
Germany granted a Romanian request to send troops to guard the Ploiești oil fields, and Hungary granted a German request to allow its troops to transit Hungary to get to Romania.
On 7 October 1940, the first German troops arrived in Ploiești.
It is probable that Romania's adherence to the pact had been delayed until the German troops were in place, lest the Soviets take preemptive action to secure the oil fields for themselves.
In turn, Hungary's adherence had been delayed until Romania's had been negotiated.
On 9 October or thereabouts, Weizsäcker delivered a message from Ribbentrop to Sztójay informing him that Hitler now wanted "friendly states" to join the pact.
In a telephone conversation with Ciano on 9 or 10 October, Ribbentrop claimed that Hungary had sent a second request to join the pact.
Mussolini reluctantly consented.
On 12 October, Ribbentrop informed Sztójay that both Italy and Japan had consented to Hungary's adherence.
Since the Hungarian regent, Miklós Horthy, had specifically instructed Sztójay to ask that Hungary be the first new state to adhere to the pact, Ribbentrop granted the request.
========,3,Romania.
The Kingdom of Romania had joined the Allied Powers in World War I and had received Transylvania from Austria–Hungary.
After Germany and Italy awarded parts of Transylvania back to Hungary and Southern Dobruja back to Bulgaria and after the Soviet Union had taken Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, the Fascist Iron Guard party came to power and Romania joined the Tripartite Pact on November 23, 1940.
This was due to the Romanian desire for protection against the Soviet Union.
In Marshal Ion Antonescu's affidavit read out at the IG Farben Trial (1947–48), he stated that the agreement for entering the pact had been concluded before his visit to Berlin on 22 November 1940.
========,3,Slovakia.
On 14 March 1939, the Slovak Republic was declared in the midst of the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia.
Hitler invited Monsignor Jozef Tiso to be the new nation's leader.
Soon after it was formed, Slovakia was involved in a war with neighboring Hungary.
Although Slovakia had signed a "Protection Treaty" with Nazi Germany, Germany refused to intervene.
The war resulted in territorial gains by Hungary at Slovakia's expense.
Even so, Slovakia supported the German invasion of Poland in 1939.
Shortly after the signing of the Tripartite Pact, following the Hungarian lead, Slovakia sent messages of "spiritual adherence" to Germany and Italy.
On 24 November 1940, the day after Romania signed the pact, the Slovak prime minister and foreign minister, Vojtech Tuka, went to Berlin to meet Ribbentrop.
There he signed Slovakia's adherence to the Tripartite Pact.
The purpose of this was to increase Tuka's standing in Slovakia relative to that of his rival, Tiso, although the Germans had no intention of permitting Tiso to be removed.
========,3,Bulgaria.
The Kingdom of Bulgaria had been on the losing side in World War I, losing territory to Serbia and Greece.
During World War II, Germany needed military access through Bulgaria in order to attack Greece.
Adolf Hitler promised the Bulgarian Tsar Boris III that Bulgaria would receive all the territory she had lost in return for Bulgaria joining the Axis.
Boris agreed and prime-minister Bogdan Filov signed the Pact on 1 March 1941.
========,3,Yugoslavia.
On March 25, 1941 in Vienna, Dragiša Cvetković, Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia, signed the Tripartite Pact.
On March 27, the regime was overthrown in a military "coup d'état" with British support.
The 17-year-old King Peter II of Yugoslavia seized power.
General Dušan Simović became Peter's Prime Minister and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia initially tried to dissolve the Pact but later declared adherence to it.
The initial agreement of the document also regarded Yugoslavia's acceptance of the free movement of German troops around the country; this was unsatisfactory to the Führer, and resulted in the Invasion of Yugoslavia.
Postponing Operation Barbarossa, the Germans simultaneously attacked Yugoslavia and Greece.
Starting on April 6, the German Air Force bombed Belgrade for three days and nights.
German ground troops moved in, and Yugoslavia capitulated on April 17.
========,2,Potential signatories.
========,3,Soviet Union.
Just prior to the formation of the Tripartite Pact, the Soviet Union was informed of its existence, and the potential of its joining.
Vyacheslav Molotov was thus sent to Berlin to discuss the pact and the possibility of the Soviet Union joining it.
For the Soviets, they considered joining the Tripartite Pact to be an update of existing agreements with Germany.
On Molotov's visit, he agreed in principle to the Soviet Union joining the pact so long as some details, such as Soviet annexation of Finland, could be worked out.
The Soviet government sent a revised version of the pact to Germany on November 25.
To demonstrate the benefits of partnership, the Soviet Union made large economic offerings to Germany.
Regardless of the talks however, the Germans had no intention of allowing the Soviets to join the pact.
They were already in the preparation stages for their invasion of the Soviet Union and were committed to doing so regardless of any action the Soviets took.
When they received the Soviet offer in November, they simply did not reply.
They did, however, accept the new economic offerings, and signed an agreement for such on January 10, 1941.
========,3,Finland.
Military co-operation between Finland and Nazi Germany started in late 1940 after Finland had lost a significant amount of her territory to Soviet aggression in the Winter War.
Finland joined Operation Barbarossa on June 25, 1941, starting the Continuation War.
In November, Finland signed the Anti-Comintern Pact (an anti-communist agreement directed against the Soviet Union) with many other countries allied with Germany.
Soon after this Germany suggested Finland sign the Tripartite Pact.
However, the Finnish government refused, because Finland saw its war as a "separate war" from the Second World War, and it saw its objectives as different from those of Nazi Germany.
Finland also wanted to maintain diplomatic relations with the Allied Powers, the United States in particular.
During the Second World War, Germany asked Finland several times to sign the pact, but always the Finnish government declined the offer.
Diplomatic relations between Finland and the United States were maintained until June 1944, although the US ambassador had already been recalled earlier.
The United Kingdom, however, declared war on Finland on 6 December 1941 in support of its ally, the Soviet Union.
At the request of the German command, the Finns established a winter warfare school in Kankaanpää.
It began its first two-month course for German officers and NCOs in December 1941.
In the summer of 1942, the German-speaking Finnish instructors taught a course on forest warfare.
General Waldemar Erfurth, the German liaison to the Finnish general headquarters, considered the school an outstanding success.
It was also attended by some Hungarian officers.
========,3,Thailand.
Japan attacked Thailand at 02:00 local time on 8 December 1941.
The Japanese ambassador, Teiji Tsubokami, told the Thai foreign minister, Direk Jayanama, that Japan only wanted permission for its troops to pass through Thailand to attack the British in Malaya and Burma.
At 07:00, Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram (Phibun) held an emergency cabinet meeting in Bangkok and soon after a ceasefire was ordered.
Phibun then met with Tsubokami, who offered him four options: to conclude a defensive–offensive alliance with Japan, to join the Tripartite Pact, to cooperate in Japanese military operations, or to agree to the joint defence of Thailand.
Military cooperation was chosen, the Tripartite Pact rejected.
According to the post-war memoires of Direk Jayanama, Phibun planned to later sign the pact, but Direk's opposition prevented this.
========,2,Tripartite relations, 1940–43.
The "joint technical commissions" required by the pact were established by an agreement of 20 December 1940.
They were to consist of a general commission in each capital, consisting of the host foreign minister and the other two partners' ambassadors.
Under the general commission were to be military and economic commissions.
On 15 December 1941 the first meeting of all three commissions in one capital, Berlin, took place, labelled a "Tripartite Pact Conference".
It was decided there to form a "Permanent Council of the Tripartite Pact Powers", but nothing happened for two months.
Only the Italians, whom the Japanese mistrusted, pushed for greater collaboration.
On 18 January 1942, the German and Italian governments signed two secret operational agreements, one with the Imperial Japanese Army and another with the Imperial Japanese Navy.
These agreements divided the world along longitude 70° east into two major operational zones, but it had almost no military significance.
Chiefly, it committed the powers to cooperation in matters of commerce, intelligence and communication.
On 24 February 1942 the Permanent Council met under the chairmanship of Ribbentrop, who announced that "the propaganda effect is one of the main reasons for our meetings".
The representatives set up a propaganda commission and then adjourned indefinitely.
The military commission in Berlin met only two or three times by 1943, and there were no trilateral naval talks at all.
Germany and Japan conducted separate naval discussions, and Italy consulted the Japanese independently for its planned assault on Malta in 1942.
The economic relationship between the Tripartite powers was fraught with difficulty.
Japan would not grant economic concessions to Germany in 1941, lest they ruin its negotiations with the United States.
In January 1942 negotiations on economic cooperation began, but an agreement was not signed until 20 January 1943 in Berlin.
Italy was invited to sign a similar agreement in Rome at the same time, for propaganda purposes, but none of the supplementary Berlin protocols applied to Italo-Japanese relations.
========,2,"No separate peace" agreement.
Japan first pressed Germany to join the war with the United States on 2 December 1941, only two days after notifying Berlin of its intention to go to war.
Receiving no response, Japan approached Italy.
At 04:00 on the morning of 5 December, Ribbentrop gave the Japanese ambassador a proposal—which had already been approved by Italy—to join the war and prosecute it jointly.
On 11 December 1941, the same day as the German declaration of war against the United States and the Italian declaration, the three powers signed an agreement—already hammered out on 8 December—barring any separate peace with the United States or Britain.
It was "intended as a propaganda accompaniment to the declaration of war".
