========,1,preface.
Igbo (; ; ;), is the principal native language of the Igbo people, an ethnic group of southeastern Nigeria.
The language has approximately 24 million speakers, who live mostly in Nigeria and are primarily of Igbo descent.
Igbo is written in the Latin script, which was introduced by British colonialists.
Igbo has over 20 dialects, though dialect levelling appears to be occurring.
A standard literary language was developed in 1972 based on the Owerri (Isuama) and Umuahia (such as Ohuhu) dialects, though it omits the nasalization and aspiration of those varieties.
Related Igboid languages such as Ika, Ikwerre and Ogba are sometimes considered dialects of Igbo; the most divergent of these isEkpeye.
Igbo is also a recognised minority language of Equatorial Guinea.
========,2,History.
The first book to publish Igbo words was "History of the Mission of the Evangelical Brothers in the Caribbean" (), published in 1777.
Shortly afterwards in 1789, "The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano" was published in London, England, written by Olaudah Equiano, a former slave, featuring 79 Igbo words.
The narrative also illustrated various aspects of Igbo life in detail, based on Olaudah Equiano's experiences in his hometown of Essaka.
Central Igbo, the dialect form gaining widest acceptance, is based on the dialects of two members of the Ezinihitte group of Igbo in Central Owerri Province between the towns of Owerri and Umuahia in Eastern Nigeria.
From its proposal as a literary form in 1939 by Dr. Ida C. Ward, it was gradually accepted by missionaries, writers, and publishers across the region.
In 1972, the Society for Promoting Igbo Language and Culture (SPILC), a nationalist organisation which saw Central Igbo as an imperialist exercise, set up a Standardisation Committee to extend Central Igbo to be a more inclusive language.
Standard Igbo aims to cross-pollinate Central Igbo with words from Igbo dialects from outside the "Central" areas, and with the adoption of loan words.
========,2,Vocabulary.
========,3,Word classes.
Lexical categories in Igbo include nouns, pronouns, numerals, verbs, adjectives, conjunctions, and a single preposition.
The meaning of "na", the single preposition, is flexible and must be ascertained from the context.
Examples from Emenanjo (2015) illustrate the range of meaning:
(1) O bì n'Enugwū.
(2) O bì ebe à n'ogè agha.
(3) Ndị Fàda kwènyèrè n'atọ̀ n'ime otù.
Igbo has an extremely limited number of adjectives in a closed class.
Emenanjo (1978, 2015) counts just eight, which occur in pairs of opposites: "ukwu" 'big', "nta" 'small'; "oji" 'dark', "ọcha" 'light'; "ọhụrụ" 'new', "ochie" 'old'; "ọma" 'good'; "ọjọọ" 'bad' (Payne 1990).
Adjectival meaning is otherwise conveyed through the use of stative verbs or abstract nouns.
Verbs, by far the most prominent category in Igbo, host most of the language's morphology and appear to be the most basic category; many processes can derive new words from verbs, but few can derive verbs from words of other classes.
========,3,Non-compositional compounds.
Many names in Igbo are actually fusions of older original words and phrases.
For example, one Igbo word for vegetable leaves is "akwụkwọ nri", which literally means "leaves for eating" or "vegetables".
Green leaves are called "akwụkwọ ndụ", because "ndụ" means "life".
Another example is train ("ụgbọ igwe"), which comes from the words "ụgbọ" (vehicle, craft) and "igwe" (iron, metal); thus a locomotive train is vehicle via iron (rails); a car, "ụgbọ ala"; vehicle via land and an aeroplane "ụgbọ elu"; "vehicle via air".
========,3,Polysemy.
Words may also take on multiple meanings.
Take for example the word "akwụkwọ".
"Akwụkwọ" originally means "leaf" (as on a tree), but during and after the colonization period, "akwụkwọ" also came to be linked to "paper," "book," "school," and "education", to become respectively "akwụkwọ édémédé", "akwụkwọ ọgụgụ", "ụlọ akwụkwọ", "mmụta akwụkwọ".
This is because printed paper can be first linked to an organic leaf, and then the paper to a book, the book to a school, and so on.
Combined with other words, "akwụkwọ" can take on many forms; for example, "akwụkwọ ego" means "printed money" or "bank notes," and "akwụkwọ ejị éjé njem" means "passport."
========,2,Phonology.
Igbo is a tonal language with two distinctive tones, high and low.
In some cases a third, downstepped high tone is recognized.
The language's tone system was given by John Goldsmith as an example of autosegmental phenomena that go beyond the linear model of phonology laid out in "The Sound Pattern of English".
Igbo words may differ only in tone.
An example is "ákwá" "cry", "àkwà" "bed", "àkwá" "egg", and "ákwà" "cloth".
As tone is not normally written, these all appear as in print.
The language features vowel harmony with two sets of oral vowels distinguished by pharyngeal cavity size described in terms of retracted tongue root (RTR).
These vowels also occupy different places in vowel space: (the last commonly transcribed , in keeping with neighboring languages).
For simplicity, phonemic transcriptions typically choose only one of these parameters to be distinctive, either RTR as in the chart at right and Igbo orthography (that is, as ), or vowel space as in the alphabetic chart below (that is, as ).
There are also nasal vowels.
Adjacent vowels usually undergo assimilation during speech.
The sound of a preceding vowel, usually at the end of one word, merges in a rapid transition to the sound of the following vowel, particularly at the start of another word, giving the second vowel greater prominence in speech.
Usually the first vowel (in the first word) is only slightly identifiable to listeners, usually undergoing centralisation.
/kà ó mésjá/, for example, becomes /kòó mésjá/ "goodbye".
An exception to this assimilation may be with words ending in /a/ such as /nà/ in /nà àlà/, "on the ground", which could be completely assimilated leaving /n/ in rapid speech, as in "nàlà" or "n'àlà".
In other dialects however, the instance of /a/ such as in "nà" in /ọ́ nà èrí ńrí/, "he/she/it is eating", results in a long vowel, /ọ́ nèèrí ńrí/.
Igbo does not have a contrast among voiced occlusives (between voiced stops and nasals): the one precedes oral vowels, and the other nasal vowels.
Only a limited number of consonants occur before nasal vowels, including .
In some dialects, such as Enu-Onitsha Igbo, the doubly articulated and are realized as a voiced/devoiced bilabial implosive.
The approximant is realized as an alveolar tap between vowels as in "árá".
The Enu-Onitsha Igbo dialect is very much similar to Enuani spoken among the Igbo-Anioma people in Delta State.
To illustrate the effect of phonological analysis, the following inventory of a typical Central dialect is taken from Clark (1990).
Nasality has been analyzed as a feature of consonants, rather than vowels, avoiding the problem of why so few consonants occur before nasal vowels; has also been analyzed as .
Syllables are of the form (C)V (optional consonant, vowel) or N (a syllabic nasal).
CV is the most common syllable type.
Every syllable bears a tone.
Consonant clusters do not occur.
The semivowels and can occur between consonant and vowel in some syllables.
The semi-vowel in is analyzed as an underlying vowel "ị", so that "-bịa" is the phonemic form of "bjá" 'come'.
On the other hand, "w" in is analyzed as an instance of labialization; so the phonemic form of the verb "-gwá" "tell" is .
========,2,Morphological typology.
Igbo is an agglutinating language that exhibits very little fusion.
The language is predominantly suffixing in a hierarchical manner, such that the ordering of suffixes is governed semantically rather than by fixed position classes.
The language has very little inflectional morphology but much derivational and extensional morphology.
Most derivation takes place with verbal roots.
Extensional suffixes, a term used in the Igbo literature, refer to morphology that has some but not all characteristics of derivation.
The words created by these suffixes always belong to the same lexical category as the root from which they are created, and the suffixes' effects are principally semantic.
On these grounds, Emenanjo (2015) asserts that the suffixes called extensional are bound lexical compounding elements; they cannot occur independently, though many are related to other free morphemes from which they may have originally been derived.
In addition to affixation, Igbo exhibits both partial and full reduplication to form gerunds from verbs.
The partial form copies on the initial consonant and inserts a high front vowel, while the full form copies the first consonant and vowel.
Both types are then prefixed with "o-".
For example, "-go" 'buy' partially reduplicates to form "ògigo" 'buying,' and "-bu" 'carry' fully reduplicates to form òbubu 'carrying.
Some other noun and verb forms also exhibit reduplication, but because the reduplicated forms are semantically unpredictable, reduplication in their case is not synchronically productive, and they are better described as separate lexical items.
========,2,Grammatical relations.
Igbo lacks overt case distinctions on nominal constituents and marks grammatical relations only through word order.
The typical Igbo sentence displays subject-verb-object (SVO) ordering, where subject is understood as the sole argument of an intransitive verb or the agent-like (external) argument of a transitive verb.
Igbo thus exhibits accusative alignment.
It has been proposed, with reservations, that some Igbo verbs display ergativity on some level, as in the following two examples:
(4) Nnukwu mmīri nà-ezò n'iro.
(5) Ọ nà-ezò nnukwu mmīri n'iro.
In (4), the verb has a single argument, "nnukwu mmīri", which appears in subject position, and in the transitive sentence (5), that same argument appears in the object position, even though the two are semantically identical.
On this basis, authors such as Emenanjuo (2015) have posited that this argument is an absolutive and that Igbo therefore contains some degree of ergativity.
However, others disagree, arguing that the relevant category is not alignment but underlying argument structure; under this hypothesis, (4) and (5) differ only in the application of a transformation and can be accounted for entirely by the unaccusative hypothesis and the Extended Projection Principle; the nominal argument is generated in object position, and either it is raised to the subject position, as in (4), or the subject position is filled with a pleonastic pronoun, as in (5).
========,2,Relative clauses.
Igbo relative clauses are externally headed and follow the head noun.
They do not employ overt relative markers or resumptive pronouns, instead leaving a gap in the position of the relativized noun.
Subjects and objects can be relativized.
Examples include (relative clauses bracketed):
(6) Ọ zụ̀-tà-rà àkwa [mā-ra mmā].
(7) Àkwa [ọ zụ̀-tà-rà] mà-rà mmā.
========,2,Voice and valence.
Igbo lacks the common valence-decreasing operation of passivization, a fact which has led multiple scholars to claim that "voice is not a relevant category in Igbo."
The language does, however, possess some valence-increasing operations that could be construed as voice under a broader definition.
Among the more common valence-changing operations is causativization, which can be expressed in multiple ways.
The most common is the verbal root "mé" 'do, make,' which forms a compound with the causativized verbal root, as in the (7) below, the causativized form of (6):
(8) Ógù a-vó-ọ-la (9) Íbè e-mé-vọ-ọ-la Ogù.
A few stative verbs can also be transitivized with the inchoative suffix "-wa/we":
(10) Àfe isé kò-ro n'ezí.
(11) Ókwu kò-we-re afe isé n'ezi.
Igbo also possess an applicative construction, which takes the suffix "-rV", where "V" copies the previous vowel, and the applicative argument follows the verb directly.
The applicative suffix is identical in form with the past tense suffix, with which it should not be confused.
For example:
(12) Íbè nye-re-re m Ógù ákwụkwọ.
(12) also illustrates Igbo ditransitive word order.
Only a double object construction, wherein the indirect object precedes the direct object, is available, to the exclusion of a prepositional dative alternative.
Nwachukwu (1987) speculates for this reason that the critical distinction in Igbo is not, therefore, between direct and indirect objects, but rather between primary and secondary objects.
========,2,Verb serialization.
Igbo permits verb serialization, which is used extensively to compensate for its paucity of prepositions.
Among the meaning types commonly expressed in serial verb constructions are instruments, datives, accompaniment, purpose, and manner.
(13) and (14) below illustrate instrumental and dative verb series, respectively:
(13) Ọ nà-èji mmà à-bacha jī.
(14) Ọ zụ̀-tà-rà akwụkwọ nye m̄.
========,2,Writing system.
The Igbo people have long used Nsibidi ideograms, invented by the neighboring Ekoi people, for basic written communication.
They have been used since at least the 16th century, but died out publicly after they became popular amongst secret societies such as the Ekpe, who used them as a secret form of communication.
Nsibidi, however, is not a full writing system, because it cannot transcribe the Igbo language specifically.
In 1960 a rural land owner and dibia named Nwagu Aneke developed a syllabary for the Umuleri dialect of Igbo, the script, named after him as the Nwagu Aneke script, was used to write hundreds of diary entires until Aneke's death in 1991.
The Nwagu Aneke Project is working on translating Nwagu's commentary and diary.
The wide variety of spoken dialects has made agreement on a standardized orthography of Igbo difficult.
The current "Ọ́nwụ́" () alphabet, a compromise between the older Lepsius alphabet and a newer alphabet advocated by the International Institute of African Languages and Cultures (IIALC), was agreed to in 1962.
It is presented in the following table, with the International Phonetic Alphabet equivalents for the characters:
The graphemes and are described both as coarticulated and and as implosives, so both values are included in the table.
Tones are sometimes indicated in writing, and sometimes not.
When tone is indicated, low tones are shown with a grave accent over the vowel, for example → , and high tones with an acute accent over the vowel, for example → .
There are also some modern movements to restore the use of and modernize nsibidi as a writing system, which mostly focus on Igbo as it is the most populous language that used to use nsibidi.
========,2,Proverbs.
Proverbs and idiomatic (ilu in Igbo) expressions are highly valued by the Igbo people and proficiency in the language means knowing how to intersperse speech with a good dose of proverbs.
Chinua Achebe (in "Things Fall Apart") describes proverbs as "the palm oil with which words are eaten".
Proverbs are widely used in the traditional society to describe, in very few words, what could have otherwise required a thousand words.
Proverbs may also become euphemistic means of making certain expressions in the Igbo society, thus the Igbo have come to typically rely on this as avenues of certain expressions.
========,2,Usage in the diaspora.
As a consequence of the Atlantic slave trade, the Igbo language was spread by enslaved Igbo people throughout slave colonies in the Americas.
These colonies include the United States, Cuba, The Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Belize, Barbados, and the Bahamas.
Examples can be found in Jamaican Patois: the pronoun , used for 'you (plural)', is taken from Igbo, "Red eboe" refers to a fair-skinned black person because of the reported account of a fair or yellowish skin tone among the Igbo.
"Soso" meaning "only" comes from Igbo.
See List of Jamaican Patois words of African origin#Igbo language for more examples.
The word "Bim", a name for Barbados, was commonly used by enslaved Barbadians (Bajans).
This word is said to derive from the Igbo language, derived from "bi mu" (or either "bem", "Ndi bem", "Nwanyi ibem" or "Nwoke ibem") (), but it may have other origins (see: Barbados etymology).
In Cuba, the Igbo language (along with the Efik language) continues to be used, albeit in a creolized form, in ceremonies of the Abakuá society, equivalent or derived from the Ekpe society in modern Nigeria.
In modern times, Igbo people in the diaspora are putting resources in place to make the study of the language accessible.
