========,1,preface.
Breadfruit ("Artocarpus altilis") is a species of flowering tree in the mulberry and jackfruit family ("Moraceae") originating in the South Pacific and eventually spreading to the rest of Oceania.
British and French navigators introduced a few Polynesian seedless varieties to Caribbean islands during the late 18th century, and today it is grown in some 90 countries throughout South and Southeast Asia, the Pacific Ocean, the Caribbean, Central America and Africa.
Its name is derived from the texture of the moderately ripe fruit when cooked, similar to freshly baked bread and having a potato-like flavor.
According to DNA fingerprinting studies, breadfruit has its origins in the region of Oceania from New Guinea through the Indo-Malayan Archipelago to western Micronesia.
The trees have been widely planted in tropical regions elsewhere, including lowland Central America, northern South America, and the Caribbean.
In addition to the fruit serving as a staple food in many cultures, the trees' light, sturdy timber has been used for outriggers, ships and houses in the tropics.
========,2,History.
Because breadfruit dispersal across Oceania was dependent on human seafaring, botanical research has correlated with the human colonization of Oceania, resulting in a theory that humans brought breadfruit seeds from Melanesia to settle in Polynesia and Micronesia over thousands of years.
Sir Joseph Banks and others saw the value of breadfruit as a highly productive food in 1769, when stationed in Tahiti as part of the "Endeavour" expedition commanded by Captain James Cook.
The late-18th-century quest for cheap, high-energy food sources for slaves in British colonies prompted colonial administrators and plantation owners to call for the plant to be brought to the Caribbean.
As President of The Royal Society, Banks provided a cash bounty and gold medal for success in this endeavor, and successfully lobbied his friends in government and the Admiralty for a British Naval expedition.
In 1787, William Bligh was appointed Captain of the HMS "Bounty", and ordered to proceed to the South Pacific to collect the plants.
In 1791, Bligh commanded a second expedition with the "Providence" and the "Assistant", which collected seedless breadfruit plants in Tahiti and transported these to St. Helena, in the Atlantic, and St. Vincent and Jamaica in the West Indies.
Although Bligh won the Royal Society medal for his efforts, the introduction was not entirely successful, as most slaves refused to eat the new food.
========,2,Description.
Breadfruit trees grow to a height of .
The large and thick leaves are deeply cut into pinnate lobes.
All parts of the tree yield latex, which is useful for boat caulking.
The trees are monoecious, with male and female flowers growing on the same tree.
The male flowers emerge first, followed shortly afterward by the female flowers.
The latter grow into capitula, which are capable of pollination just three days later.
Pollination occurs mainly by fruit bats, but cultivated varieties produce fruit without pollination.
The compound, false fruit develops from the swollen perianth, and originates from 1,500-2,000 flowers visible on the skin of the fruit as hexagon-like disks.
Breadfruit is one of the highest-yielding food plants, with a single tree producing up to 200 or more grapefruit-sized fruits per season, requiring limited care.
In the South Pacific, the trees yield 50 to 150 fruits per year, usually round, oval or oblong weighing 0.25–6 kg.
Productivity varies between wet and dry areas.
Studies in Barbados indicate a reasonable potential of 16 to 32 tons per hectare (6.7-13.4 tons/acre).
The ovoid fruit has a rough surface, and each fruit is divided into many achenes, each achene surrounded by a fleshy perianth and growing on a fleshy receptacle.
Most selectively bred cultivars have seedless fruit, whereas seeded varieties are grown mainly for their edible seeds.
Breadfruit is usually propagated using root cuttings.
Breadfruit is closely related to the breadnut, from which it might have been naturally selected.
It is noticeably similar in appearance to its relative of the same genus, the jackfruit ("Artocarpus heterophyllus").
Breadfruit has hundreds of varieties and thousands of common names varying according to its geographic distribution, and is cultivated in some 90 countries.
========,2,Habitat.
Breadfruit, an equatorial lowland species, grows best below elevations of , but is found at elevations of .
Preferred soils are neutral to alkaline (pH of 6.1–7.4) and either sand, sandy loam, loam or sandy clay loam.
Breadfruit is able to grow in coral sands and saline soils.
The breadfruit is ultra-tropical, requiring a temperature range of and an annual rainfall of .
========,2,Nutrition.
Breadfruit is 71% water, 27% carbohydrates, 1% protein and negligible in fat (table).
In a 100 gram amount, raw breadfruit is a rich source (35% of the Daily Value, DV) of vitamin C, a good source (10% DV each) of thiamin and potassium, with no other nutrients in significant content.
========,2,Uses.
Breadfruit is a staple food in many tropical regions.
The trees were first propagated far outside their native range by Polynesian voyagers who transported root cuttings and air-layered plants over long ocean distances.
Breadfruit are very rich in starch, which transforms to sugars when very ripe.
Before being eaten, the fruits are roasted, baked, fried or boiled.
When cooked, the taste of moderately ripe breadfruit is described as potato-like, or similar to freshly baked bread.
Because breadfruit trees usually produce large crops at certain times of the year, preservation of the harvested fruit is an issue.
One traditional preservation technique is to bury peeled and washed fruits in a leaf-lined pit where they ferment over several weeks and produce a sour, sticky paste.
So stored, the product may last a year or more, and some pits are reported to have produced edible contents more than 20 years later.
Fermented breadfruit mash goes by many names such as "mahr", "ma", "masi", "furo", and "bwiru", among others.
Most breadfruit varieties also produce a small number of fruits throughout the year.
Fresh breadfruit is always available, but somewhat rare when not in season.
Breadfruit can be eaten once cooked, or can be further processed into a variety of other foods.
A common product is a mixture of cooked or fermented breadfruit mash mixed with coconut milk and baked in banana leaves.
Whole fruits can be cooked in an open fire, then cored and filled with other foods, such as coconut milk, sugar and butter, cooked meats, or other fruits.
The filled fruit can be cooked further so the flavor of the filling permeates the flesh of the breadfruit.
The Hawaiian staple food called "poi", made of mashed taro root, is easily substituted for, or augmented with, mashed breadfruit.
The resulting "breadfruit poi" is called "poi ulu".
Breadfruit is also found in Indonesia and Malaysia, where it is called "sukun".
In Indonesia, fried breadfruit is easily found being sold by street food vendors, and is known as gorengan.
In the South Indian state of Kerala and coastal Karnataka, especially near Mangalore, where it is widely grown and cooked, it is known as "kada chakka", "seema chakka", "jee kujje", or "dee gujje".
Breadfruit was brought to the Caribbean area and successfully cultivated.
In Belize, the Mayan people call it "masapan".
In Puerto Rico, breadfruit is called "panapen" or "pana", for short.
In some in-land regions it is also called "mapén".
"Pana" is often served boiled with a mixture of sauteed "bacalao" (salted cod fish), olive oil and onions.
It is also served as "tostones" or "mofongo".
In the Dominican Republic, it is known by the name "buen pan" or "good bread".
Breadfruit was widely used in a variety of ways among Pacific Islanders.
Its lightweight wood (specific gravity of 0.27) is resistant to termites and shipworms, so it is used as timber for structures and outrigger canoes.
Its wood pulp can also be used to make paper, called breadfruit "tapa".
Native Hawaiians used its sticky latex to trap birds, whose feathers were made into cloaks.
The wood of the breadfruit tree was one of the most valuable timbers in the construction of traditional houses in Samoan architecture.
Breadfruit contains phytochemicals having potential as an insect repellent.
The parts of the fruits that are discarded can be used to feed livestock.
The leaves of breadfruit trees can also be browsed by cattle.
========,2,In culture.
On Puluwat in the Caroline Islands, in the context of sacred "yitang" lore, breadfruit ("poi") is a figure of speech for knowledge.
This lore is organized into five categories: war, magic, meetings, navigation, and "breadfruit".
According to an etiological Hawaiian myth, the breadfruit originated from the sacrifice of the war god Kū.
After deciding to live secretly among mortals as a farmer, Kū married and had children.
He and his family lived happily until a famine seized their island.
When he could no longer bear to watch his children suffer, Kū told his wife that he could deliver them from starvation, but to do so he would have to leave them.
Reluctantly she agreed, and at her word, Kū descended into the ground right where he had stood until only the top of his head was visible.
His family waited around the spot he had last been, day and night, watering it with their tears until suddenly, a small green shoot appeared where Kū had stood.
Quickly, the shoot grew into a tall and leafy tree that was laden with heavy breadfruits that Kū's family and neighbors gratefully ate, joyfully saved from starvation.
Though they are widely distributed throughout the Pacific, many breadfruit hybrids and cultivars are seedless or otherwise biologically incapable of naturally dispersing long distances.
Therefore, it is clear that humans aided distribution of the plant in the Pacific, specifically prehistoric groups who colonized the Pacific Islands.
To investigate the patterns of human migration throughout the Pacific, scientists have used molecular dating of breadfruit hybrids and cultivars in concert with anthropological data.
Results support the west-to-east migration hypothesis, in which the Lapita people are thought to have traveled from Melanesia to numerous Polynesian islands.
The world's largest collection of breadfruit varieties has been established by botanist Diane Ragone, from over 20 years' travel to 50 Pacific islands, on a plot outside of Hana, Hawaii, on the isolated east coast of Maui.
========,2,Recipes.
There are many ways to cook breadfruit.
In Sri Lanka, it is either cooked as a curry using coconut milk and spices (which becomes a side dish) or consumed after boiling.
Boiled breadfruit is a famous main meal.
It is often consumed with scraped coconut or "coconut sambol", made of scraped coconut, red chilli powder and salt mixed with a dash of lime juice.
A traditional sweet snack made of finely sliced, sun-dried breadfruit chips deep-fried in coconut oil and dipped in heated treacle or sugar syrup is known as "rata del petti".
In India, fritters of breadfruit, called "jeev kadge phodi" in Konkani or "kadachakka varuthath" in Malayalam are a local delicacy in coastal Karnataka and Kerala.
In Seychelles, it was traditionally eaten as a substitute for rice, as an accompaniment to the mains.
It would either be consumed boiled ("friyapen bwi") or grilled ("friyapen griye"), where it would be put whole in the wood fire used for cooking the main meal and then taken out when ready.
It is also eaten as a dessert, called "ladob friyapen", where it is boiled in coconut milk, sugar, vanilla, cinnamon and a pinch of salt.
In Puerto Rico, it is traditionally eaten boiled with bacalao (salted codfish).
It is also used to make "rellenos de pana" (mashed breadfruit filled with seasoned meat), mofongo, "tostones de pana" (double fried breadfruit), and even "lasaña de pana" (cooked mashed breadfruit layered with meat and topped with cheese).
A popular dessert is also made with sweet ripe breadfruit: "flan de pana" (breadfruit custard).
In Barbados, breadfruit is boiled with salted meat and mashed with butter to make breadfruit coucou.
It is usually eaten with saucy meat dishes.
Both ripe and unripe fruits have culinary uses, but unripe breadfruit is cooked before consumption.
