========,1,preface.
Anna Sewell (; 30 March 1820 – 25 April 1878) was an English novelist.
She is best known as the author of the 1877 novel "Black Beauty," one of the top ten best selling novels for children ever written.
========,2,Early life.
Sewell was born on 30 March 1820 in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, into a devoutly Quaker family.
Her father was Isaac Phillip Sewell (1793–1879), and her mother, Mary Wright Sewell (1798–1884), was a successful author of children's books.
She had one sibling, a younger brother named Philip.
The children were largely educated at home by their mother due to a lack of money for schooling.
In 1822, Isaac's business, a small shop, failed and the family moved to Dalston, London.
Life was difficult for the family, and Isaac and Mary frequently sent Philip and Anna to stay with Mary's parents in Buxton, Norfolk.
In 1824, Sewell slipped at home and severely injured her ankle.
For the rest of her life she could not stand without a crutch or walk for any length of time.
For greater mobility, she frequently used horse-drawn carriages, which contributed to her love of horses and concern for the humane treatment of animals.
In 1832, when she was twelve, the family moved to Stoke Newington and Sewell attended school for the first time.
========,2,Adult life.
In 1836, Sewell's father took a job in Brighton, in the hope that the climate there would help to cure her.
At about the same time, both Sewell and her mother left the Society of Friends to join the Church of England, though both remained active in evangelical circles.
Her mother expressed her religious faith most noticeably by authoring a series of evangelical children's books, which Sewell helped to edit, though all the Sewells, and Mary Sewell's family, the Wrights, engaged in many other good works.
Sewell assisted her mother, for example, to establish a Working Man's Club, and worked with her on temperance and abolitionist campaigns.
In 1845, the family moved to Lancing, and Sewell's health began to deteriorate.
She travelled to Europe the following year to seek treatments.
On her return, the family continued to relocate – to Wick in 1858, and to Bath in 1864.
In 1866, Philip's wife died, leaving him with seven young children to care for, and the following year the Sewells moved to Old Catton, a village outside the city of Norwich in Norfolk, to support him.
While living there, Sewell wrote the manuscript of "Black Beauty -" in the period between 1871 and 1877.
During this time her health was declining; she was often so weak that she was confined to her bed and writing was a challenge.
She dictated the text to her mother and from 1876 began to write on slips of paper which her mother then transcribed.
Although the book is now considered a children's classic, Sewell originally wrote it for those who worked with horses.
She said "a special aim [was] to induce kindness, sympathy, and an understanding treatment of horses".
In many respects the book can be read as a guide to horse husbandry, stable management and humane training practices for colts.
It is considered to have had an effect on reducing cruelty to horses; for example, the use of bearing reins, which are particularly painful for a horse, was one of the practices highlighted in the novel, and in the years after the book's release the reins became less popular and fell out of favour.
Sewell sold the novel to London publisher Jarrolds on 24 November 1877, when she was 57 years old.
She received a single payment of ₤40 and the book was published the same year.
Sewell was in extreme pain and completely bedridden for the folllowing months, and she died on 25 April 1878 of hepatitis or tuberculosis.
She was buried on 30 April 1878 in the Quaker burial-ground at Lammas near Buxton, Norfolk, not far from Norwich.
========,3,Memorials and monuments.
Sewell's birthplace in Church Plain, Great Yarmouth has been the home to a museum and a tea shop.
The house in Old Catton where she wrote "Black Beauty" is now known as Anna Sewell House.
There is an Anna Sewell memorial fountain and horse trough outside the public library in Ansonia, Connecticut, in the United States of America.
It was donated by Caroline Phelps Stokes, a philantropist known for her work supporting animal welfare, in 1892.
A memorial fountain to Sewell is located at the junction of Constitution Hill and St. Clement's Hill in Norwich, which also marks the entrance to Sewell Park.
The fountain was placed in 1917 by Sewell's neice Ada Sewell.
In 1984 the graveyard where Sewell was buried was demolished, and her gravestone was removed and placed on a wall nearby.
