========,1,preface.
Deborah Mazar ( or ; born August 13, 1964) is an American actress and television personality, known for her Jersey Girl-type roles, as well as playing sharp-tongued women.
She began her career with supporting roles in "Goodfellas" (1990), "Singles" (1992), and "Batman Forever" (1995), followed by lead roles on the police drama series "Civil Wars" and "L.A. Law".
Beginning in 2014, she has had a starring role in the Cooking Channel series, "Extra Virgin", along with her husband Gabriele Corcos.
She is also known for her role as press agent Shauna Roberts on the HBO series "Entourage" and currently stars as Maggie on TV Land's "Younger".
========,2,Early life.
Mazar was born in Jamaica, Queens, New York City, the daughter of Nancy and Harry Mazar.
Her father was born in the Latvian SSR, Soviet Union, to a Jewish family, but raised Roman Catholic.
She had no knowledge of her father's ancestry until her twenties.
Mazar's parents annulled their marriage shortly after she was born, and she spent her early life in the country in upstate New York with her mother.
As a teenager, she relocated to Long Island, where she lived with her godparents.
Mazar worked various odd jobs, including selling jewelry at Fiorucci with Linda Ramone and Joey Arias, later as a dental assistant, and at a nightclub.
========,2,Career.
While working at Danceteria, Mazar met Madonna.
She hired Mazar to do her makeup for the music video for "Everybody".
She also originated the hair and makeup for the play "Speed-the-Plow".
Mazar began her career as a hip hop b-girl in New York City.
Her first television appearance was on the pilot for a hip hop television dance show, "Graffiti Rock" in 1984.
She appeared in five of Madonna's music videos – "Papa Don't Preach", "True Blue" (both 1986), "Justify My Love" (1990), "Deeper and Deeper" (1992) and "Music" (2000).
Mazar has played a number of minor supporting roles in a variety of films, including Sandy, a friend of Henry Hill's mistress in "Goodfellas" (1990); "The Doors" (1991); a small role in Spike Lee's "Malcolm X" (1992); "Bullets Over Broadway" (1994); and as Spice (of Sugar and Spice, with Drew Barrymore as Sugar) in "Batman Forever" (1995).
She gained her first real following from playing a character on "Civil Wars" in the early 1990s.
When that series was cancelled her character was brought over as a recurring role between 1993 and 1994 season of the TV drama "L.A. Law".
She played the villain Regina, a modern-day Cruella de Vil, in the family film "Beethoven's 2nd" (1993).
She has appeared in independent films "Inside Monkey Zetterland" and "Nowhere" and her short-lived sitcom, "Temporarily Yours".
She appeared as the genie in the Space Monkeys' music video, "Sugarcane".
Mazar appeared on a "Friends" episode in its eighth season ("The One Where Rachel Has a Baby, Part One").
Mazar played "Doreen, the Evil Bitch," a crazed pregnant woman who shares a hospital room with Rachel.
In the 1999 docudrama film "The Insider" she played character Lowell Bergman's assistant Debi.
From 2000-02 she played Jackie on the television drama "That's Life".
She provided the voice of Maria Latore in the video games "Grand Theft Auto III" (2001) and "" (2004).
From 2004-11, she had a supporting role on "Entourage" as press agent Shauna Roberts.
She also had a recurring role on the sitcom "Living with Fran", playing Fran Drescher's character's cousin, Merrill.
She did a two-episode stint on the television series "Ugly Betty" as fraudster Leah Stillman.
Mazar was a contestant on the ninth season of "Dancing With the Stars".
She was partnered with Maksim Chmerkovskiy and finished in twelfth place.
She was eliminated in the third week (October 6, 2009).
In 2012, Mazar played Jessica, a glamorous, leather-clad villainess in "".
Mazar began appearing on a Cooking Channel cooking/reality show television series in January 2011.
She, her husband Gabriele Corcos, and their two daughters star in the series, which depicts their lives, and showcases their own recipes.
The show is scripted.
The show has had four seasons as of June 2014.
In 2015, Mazar and her husband started another series on the Cooking Channel entitled "Extra Virgin Americana" where they travel the U.S., road trip style, with their children and family friend searching for great food.
========,2,Personal life.
Prior to her marriage, she dated actor Paul Reubens for several years beginning in 1993.
Reubens has since credited Mazar with ending his depression resulting from his infamous 1991 arrest.
She married Gabriele Corcos on March 16, 2002, in a ceremony officiated by Ellen Burstyn.
They have two daughters, one named Giulia.
The family formerly lived in Los Angeles but moved to Brooklyn, New York in 2009.
They opened a cafe/restaurant called "Tuscan Gun."
The family currently divides their time between Brooklyn and a 14th-century home outside of Florence, Italy, that was given to them as a wedding present by Mazar's in-laws.
Mazar has had several dogs, including a dog named Delores which was prominently featured in the first season of her show "Extra Virgin", until the dog's death in 2011.
Mazar and Corcos formerly hosted an internet show focused on Tuscan cuisine, "Under The Tuscan Gun".
On January 19, 2011, Debi, and her husband Gabriele began hosting the cooking show "Extra Virgin" on the Cooking Channel, and released a cookbook, "Recipes & Love From Our Tuscan Kitchen", in 2014.
Mazar and her husband both appeared on an episode of the ABC talk show "The Chew" in 2014 to promote their show, "Extra Virgin".
