========,1,preface.
Proxima Centauri (), or Alpha Centauri C, is a red dwarf, a small low-mass star, about from the Sun in the constellation of Centaurus.
It was discovered in 1915 by the Scottish astronomer Robert Innes, the Director of the Union Observatory in South Africa, and is the nearest-known star to the Sun.
With an apparent magnitude of 11.05, it is too faint to be seen with the naked eye.
Proxima Centauri forms a third component of the Alpha Centauri binary star system, currently with a separation of about and an orbital period of 550,000 years.
Because of Proxima Centauri's proximity to Earth, its angular diameter can be measured directly.
It is about one-seventh the diameter of the Sun.
It has a mass about an eighth of the Sun's mass (), and its average density is about 40 times that of the Sun.
Although it has a very low average luminosity, Proxima is a flare star that undergoes random dramatic increases in brightness because of magnetic activity.
The star's magnetic field is created by convection throughout the stellar body, and the resulting flare activity generates a total X-ray emission similar to that produced by the Sun.
The mixing of the fuel at Proxima Centauri's core through convection and its relatively low energy-production rate mean that it will be a main-sequence star for another four trillion years, or nearly 300 times the current age of the universe.
In 2016, the European Southern Observatory announced the discovery of Proxima b, a planet orbiting the star at a distance of roughly with an orbital period of approximately 11.2 Earth days.
Its estimated mass is at least 1.3 times that of the Earth.
The equilibrium temperature of Proxima b is estimated to be within the range of where water could exist as liquid on its surface, thus placing it within the habitable zone of Proxima Centauri, although because Proxima Centauri is a red dwarf and a flare star, whether it could support life is disputed.
Previous searches for orbiting companions had ruled out the presence of brown dwarfs and supermassive planets.
========,2,Observation.
In 1915, the Scottish astronomer Robert Innes, Director of the Union Observatory in Johannesburg, South Africa, discovered a star that had the same proper motion as Alpha Centauri.
He suggested that it be named "Proxima Centauri" (actually "Proxima Centaurus").
In 1917, at the Royal Observatory at the Cape of Good Hope, the Dutch astronomer Joan Voûte measured the star's trigonometric parallax at and determined that Proxima Centauri was approximately the same distance from the Sun as Alpha Centauri.
It was also found to be the lowest-luminosity star known at the time.
An equally accurate parallax determination of Proxima Centauri was made by American astronomer Harold L. Alden in 1928, who confirmed Innes's view that it is closer, with a parallax of .
In 1951, American astronomer Harlow Shapley announced that Proxima Centauri is a flare star.
Examination of past photographic records showed that the star displayed a measurable increase in magnitude on about 8% of the images, making it the most active flare star then known.
The proximity of the star allows for detailed observation of its flare activity.
In 1980, the Einstein Observatory produced a detailed X-ray energy curve of a stellar flare on Proxima Centauri.
Further observations of flare activity were made with the EXOSAT and ROSAT satellites, and the X-ray emissions of smaller, solar-like flares were observed by the Japanese ASCA satellite in 1995.
Proxima Centauri has since been the subject of study by most X-ray observatories, including XMM-Newton and Chandra.
In 2016, the International Astronomical Union organized a Working Group on Star Names (WGSN) to catalogue and standardize proper names for stars.
The WGSN approved the name "Proxima Centauri" for this star on August 21, 2016 and it is so entered in the IAU Catalog of Star Names.
Because of Proxima Centauri's southern declination, it can only be viewed south of latitude 27° N. Red dwarfs such as Proxima Centauri are far too faint to be seen with the naked eye.
Even from Alpha Centauri A or B, Proxima would only be seen as a fifth magnitude star.
It has an apparent visual magnitude of 11, so a telescope with an aperture of at least is needed to observe it, even under ideal viewing conditions—under clear, dark skies with Proxima Centauri well above the horizon.
========,2,Characteristics.
Proxima Centauri is a red dwarf, because it belongs to the main sequence on the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram and is of spectral class M6.
M6 means that it falls in the low-mass end of M-type stars.
Its absolute visual magnitude, or its visual magnitude as viewed from a distance of , is 15.5.
Its total luminosity over all wavelengths is 0.17% that of the Sun, although when observed in the wavelengths of visible light the eye is most sensitive to, it is only 0.0056% as luminous as the Sun.
More than 85% of its radiated power is at infrared wavelengths.
It has a regular activity cycle of starspots.
In 2002, optical interferometry with the Very Large Telescope (VLTI) found that the angular diameter of Proxima Centauri was .
Because its distance is known, the actual diameter of Proxima Centauri can be calculated to be about 1/7 that of the Sun, or 1.5 times that of Jupiter.
The star's estimated mass is , or 129 Jupiter masses ().
The mean density of a main-sequence star increases with decreasing mass, and Proxima Centauri is no exception: it has a mean density of , compared with the Sun's mean density of .
A 1998 study of photometric variations indicates that Proxima Centauri rotates once every 83.5 days.
A subsequent time series analysis of chromospheric indicators in 2002 suggests a longer rotation period of  days.
This was subsequently ruled out in favor of a rotation period of  days.
Because of its low mass, the interior of the star is completely convective, causing energy to be transferred to the exterior by the physical movement of plasma rather than through radiative processes.
This convection means that the helium ash left over from the thermonuclear fusion of hydrogen does not accumulate at the core, but is instead circulated throughout the star.
Unlike the Sun, which will only burn through about 10% of its total hydrogen supply before leaving the main sequence, Proxima Centauri will consume nearly all of its fuel before the fusion of hydrogen comes to an end.
Convection is associated with the generation and persistence of a magnetic field.
The magnetic energy from this field is released at the surface through stellar flares that briefly increase the overall luminosity of the star.
These flares can grow as large as the star and reach temperatures measured as high as 27 million K—hot enough to radiate X-rays.
Proxima Centauri's quiescent X-ray luminosity, approximately (4–16) erg/s ((4–16) W), is roughly equal to that of the much larger Sun.
The peak X-ray luminosity of the largest flares can reach  erg/s ( W).
Proxima Centauri's chromosphere is active, and its spectrum displays a strong emission line of singly ionized magnesium at a wavelength of 280 nm.
About 88% of the surface of Proxima Centauri may be active, a percentage that is much higher than that of the Sun even at the peak of the solar cycle.
Even during quiescent periods with few or no flares, this activity increases the corona temperature of Proxima Centauri to 3.5 million K, compared to the 2 million K of the Sun's corona.
Proxima Centauri's overall activity level is considered low compared to other red dwarfs, which is consistent with the star's estimated age of 4.85 years, since the activity level of a red dwarf is expected to steadily wane over billions of years as its stellar rotation rate decreases.
The activity level also appears to vary with a period of roughly 442 days, which is shorter than the solar cycle of 11 years.
Proxima Centauri has a relatively weak stellar wind, no more than 20% of the mass loss rate of the solar wind.
Because the star is much smaller than the Sun, the mass loss per unit surface area from Proxima Centauri may be eight times that from the solar surface.
A red dwarf with the mass of Proxima Centauri will remain on the main sequence for about four trillion years.
As the proportion of helium increases because of hydrogen fusion, the star will become smaller and hotter, gradually transforming from red to blue.
Near the end of this period it will become significantly more luminous, reaching 2.5% of the Sun's luminosity () and warming up any orbiting bodies for a period of several billion years.
When the hydrogen fuel is exhausted, Proxima Centauri will then evolve into a white dwarf (without passing through the red giant phase) and steadily lose any remaining heat energy.
========,3,Distance and motion.
Based on a parallax of , published in 2014 by the Research Consortium On Nearby Stars, Proxima Centauri is about from the Sun.
Previously published parallaxes include in the Hipparcos Catalogue (1997) and using the Hubble Space Telescope Fine Guidance Sensors (1999).
From Earth's vantage point, Proxima is separated from Alpha Centauri by 2.18 degrees, or four times the angular diameter of the full Moon.
Proxima also has a relatively large proper motion—moving 3.85 arcseconds per year across the sky.
It has a radial velocity toward the Sun of 22.4 km/s.
Among the known stars, Proxima Centauri has been the closest star to the Sun for about 32,000 years and will be so for about another 25,000 years, after which the closest star to the Sun will be Alpha Centauri.
In 2001, J. García-Sánchez "et al."
predicted that Proxima will make its closest approach to the Sun in approximately 26,700 years, coming within .
A 2010 study by V. V. Bobylev predicted a closest approach distance of in about 27,400 years, followed by a 2014 study by C. A. L. Bailer-Jones predicting a perihelion approach of in roughly 26,710 years.
Proxima Centauri is orbiting through the Milky Way at a distance from the Galactic Centre that varies from , with an orbital eccentricity of 0.07.
Ever since the discovery of Proxima, it has been suspected to be a true companion of the Alpha Centauri binary star system.
Data from the Hipparcos satellite, combined with ground-based observations, were consistent with the hypothesis that the three stars are a bound system.
For this reason, Proxima is sometimes referred to as Alpha Centauri C. Kervella et al.
(2017) used high-precision radial velocity measurements to determine with a high degree of confidence that Proxima and Alpha Centauri are gravitationally bound.
Proxima's orbital period around the Alpha Centauri AB barycenter is years with an eccentricity of ; it approaches Alpha Centauri to at periastron and retreats to at apastron.
At present, Proxima is from the Alpha Centauri AB barycenter, nearly to the farthest point in its orbit.
Such a triple system can form naturally through a low-mass star being dynamically captured by a more massive binary of within their embedded star cluster before the cluster disperses.
However, more accurate measurements of the radial velocity is needed to confirm this hypothesis.
If Proxima was bound to the Alpha Centauri system during its formation, the stars are likely to share the same elemental composition.
The gravitational influence of Proxima might also have stirred up the Alpha Centauri protoplanetary disks.
This would have increased the delivery of volatiles such as water to the dry inner regions, so possibly enriching any terrestrial planets in the system with this material.
Six single stars, two binary star systems, and a triple star share a common motion through space with Proxima Centauri and the Alpha Centauri system.
The space velocities of these stars are all within 10 km/s of Alpha Centauri's peculiar motion.
Thus, they may form a moving group of stars, which would indicate a common point of origin, such as in a star cluster.
Though Proxima Centauri is the nearest bona fide star, it is still possible that one or more as-yet undetected sub-stellar brown dwarfs may lie closer.
========,2,Planetary system.
The first indications of the exoplanet were found in 2013 by Mikko Tuomi of the University of Hertfordshire from archival observation data.
To confirm the possible discovery, the European Southern Observatory launched the Pale Red Dot project in January 2016.
On August 24, 2016, the team of 31 scientists from all around the world, led by Guillem Anglada-Escudé of Queen Mary University of London, confirmed the existence of Proxima Centauri b through a peer-reviewed article published by "Nature".
The measurements were performed using two spectrographs: HARPS on the ESO 3.6 m Telescope at La Silla Observatory and UVES on the 8 m Very Large Telescope at Paranal Observatory.
Proxima Centauri b is a planet orbiting the star at a distance of roughly with an orbital period of approximately 11.2 Earth days.
Its estimated mass is at least 1.3 times that of the Earth.
Moreover, the equilibrium temperature of Proxima b is estimated to be within the range where water could exist as liquid on its surface; thus, placing it within the habitable zone of Proxima Centauri.
A second signal in the range of 60 to 500 days was also detected, but its nature is still unclear due to stellar activity.
Prior to this discovery, multiple measurements of the star's radial velocity constrained the maximum mass that a detectable companion to Proxima Centauri could possess.
The activity level of the star adds noise to the radial velocity measurements, complicating detection of a companion using this method.
In 1998, an examination of Proxima Centauri using the Faint Object Spectrograph on board the Hubble Space Telescope appeared to show evidence of a companion orbiting at a distance of about 0.5 AU.
A subsequent search using the Wide Field Planetary Camera 2 failed to locate any companions.
Astrometric measurements at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American Observatory appear to rule out a Jovian companion with an orbital period of 2−12 years.
Proxima Centauri, along with Alpha Centauri A and B, was among the "Tier 1" target stars for NASA's now-canceled Space Interferometry Mission (SIM), which would theoretically have been able to detect planets as small as three Earth masses () within two AU of a "Tier 1" target star.
========,3,Habitable zone.
Prior to the discovery of Proxima Centauri b, the TV documentary "" hypothesized that a life-sustaining planet could exist in orbit around Proxima Centauri or other red dwarfs.
Such a planet would lie within the habitable zone of Proxima Centauri, about from the star, and would have an orbital period of 3.6–14 days.
A planet orbiting within this zone may experience tidal locking to the star.
If the orbital eccentricity of this hypothetical planet is low, Proxima Centauri would move little in the planet's sky, and most of the surface would experience either day or night perpetually.
The presence of an atmosphere could serve to redistribute the energy from the star-lit side to the far side of the planet.
Proxima Centauri's flare outbursts could erode the atmosphere of any planet in its habitable zone, but the documentary's scientists thought that this obstacle could be overcome.
Gibor Basri of the University of California, Berkeley, mentioned that "no one [has] found any showstoppers to habitability".
For example, one concern was that the torrents of charged particles from the star's flares could strip the atmosphere off any nearby planet.
If the planet had a strong magnetic field, the field would deflect the particles from the atmosphere; even the slow rotation of a tidally locked planet that spins once for every time it orbits its star would be enough to generate a magnetic field, as long as part of the planet's interior remained molten.
Other scientists, especially proponents of the rare-Earth hypothesis, disagree that red dwarfs can sustain life.
Any exoplanet in this star's habitable zone would likely be tidally locked, resulting in a relatively weak planetary magnetic moment, leading to strong atmospheric erosion by coronal mass ejections from Proxima Centauri.
========,2,Interstellar travel.
Because of the star's proximity to Earth, Proxima Centauri has been proposed as a flyby destination for interstellar travel.
Proxima currently moves toward Earth at a rate of 22.4 km/s.
After 26,700 years, when it will come within 3.11 light-years, it will begin to move farther away.
If non-nuclear, conventional propulsion technologies are used, the flight of a spacecraft to a planet orbiting Proxima Centauri would probably require thousands of years.
For example, "Voyager 1", which is now travelling relative to the Sun, would reach Proxima in 73,775 years, were the spacecraft travelling in the direction of that star.
A slow-moving probe would have only several tens of thousands of years to catch Proxima Centauri near its closest approach, and could end up watching it recede into the distance.
Nuclear pulse propulsion might enable such interstellar travel with a trip timescale of a century, inspiring several studies such as Project Orion, Project Daedalus, and Project Longshot.
Project Breakthrough Starshot aims to reach the Alpha Centauri system within the first half of the 21st century, with microprobes travelling at twenty percent of the speed of light propelled by around 100 gigawatts of Earth-based lasers.
From Proxima Centauri, the Sun would appear as a bright 0.4-magnitude star in the constellation Cassiopeia.
