========,1,preface.
, occasionally shortened to Strawberry Eggs, is a 2001 Japanese anime television series animated by TNK with co-production by Pioneer, LDC.
The series aired from July 4 to September 26, 2001 by WOWOW and in August 2002 was licensed by Geneon Entertainment.
========,2,Plot.
Hibiki Amawa is an enthusiastic young man whose dream career is to be a professional teacher, having graduated from college with a certificate in athletics.
When he is unable to pay his landlady, Lulu Sanjo, the monthly rent for his apartment, he rushes off to the nearby Seito Sannomiya Private School to apply for a position that is open, but is summarily denied employment because of his gender.
Offended, and more determined than ever to have his way, Hibiki vows to demonstrate the merits of his educational philosophy to his detractors, and with offered help from Lulu, agrees to disguise himself by cross-dressing in order to deceive the school's female-only administration.
With assistance from some gadgets Lulu engineered for this purpose, he disguises himself very convincingly.
Following an initial demonstration of his merits as an educator, he is hired.
Unfortunately for Hibiki, however, life as a gym teacher at this school does not go completely smoothly.
With interpersonal conflicts among students causing fights and occasional mild missteps endangering his disguise, Hibiki must not only mediate his class, but also keep up appearances and navigate life in disguise.
========,2,Production.
The anime series is produced by TNK, with co-production by Pioneer, LDC, and is directed by Yuji Yamaguchi.
The series aired in Japan on WOWOW between July 4 and September 26, 2001 containing thirteen episodes.
The anime's original concept was by Yom who was assisted by Kenichi Murakami.
The series structure and screenplay was written by Yasuko Kobayashi.
The series was licensed by Geneon Entertainment in August 2002 .
As of December 2007, the series is out of print Two pieces of theme music were used for the anime; one opening theme and one ending theme.
The opening theme is "Dearest" sung by Hitomi Nozaki, with lyrics by Syoko Sawada, and arrangement by Masala Nishida.
The ending theme is "White Station" by Acefile composed of Mae Yoshikawa, Marina Kushi, Asagi Kudo, Saori Nara, with lyrics by Rei Yoshii, and arrangement by Masala Nishida.
Other music was provided by Masala Nishida.
