========,1,preface.
The Cree (; ) are one of the largest groups of First Nations in North America, with over 200,000 members living in Canada.
The major proportion of Cree in Canada live north and west of Lake Superior, in Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and the Northwest Territories.
About 38,000 live in Quebec.
In the United States, this Algonquian-speaking people historically lived from Lake Superior westward.
Today, they live mostly in Montana, where they share a reservation with the Ojibwe (Chippewa).
The documented westward migration over time has been strongly associated with their roles as traders and hunters in the North American fur trade.
========,2,Sub-groups.
The Cree are generally divided into eight groups based on dialect and region.
These divisions do not necessarily represent ethnic sub-divisions within the larger ethnic group:
***LIST***.
Due to the many dialects of the Cree language, there is no modern collective autonym.
The Plains Cree and Attikamekw refer to themselves using modern forms of the historical "nêhiraw", namely "nêhiyaw" and "nêhirawisiw", respectively.
Moose Cree, East Cree, Naskapi, and Montagnais all refer to themselves using modern dialectal forms of the historical "iriniw", meaning 'man.'
Moose Cree use the form "ililiw", coastal East Cree and Naskapi use "iyiyiw" (variously spelled "iiyiyiu", "iiyiyuu", and "eeyou"), inland East Cree use "iyiniw" (variously spelled "iinuu" and "eenou"), and Montagnais use "ilnu" and "innu", depending on dialect.
The Cree use "Cree," "cri," "Naskapi, or "montagnais" to refer to their people only when speaking the languages of the European colonists, French or English.
========,2,Political aboriginal organization.
========,3,Historical.
As hunter-gatherers, the basic unit of organization for Cree peoples was the "lodge", a group of perhaps eight or a dozen people, usually the families of two separate but related married couples, who lived together in the same wigwam (domed tent) or tipi (conical tent), and the "band", a group of lodges who moved and hunted together.
In the case of disagreement lodges could leave bands, and bands could be formed and dissolved with relative ease, but as there is safety in numbers, all families would want to be part of some band, and banishment was considered a very serious punishment.
Bands would usually have strong ties to their neighbours through intermarriage and would assemble together at different parts of the year to hunt and socialize together.
Besides these regional gatherings, there was no higher-level formal structure, and decisions of war and peace were made by consensus with allied bands meeting together in council.
People could be identified by their "clan", which is a group of people claiming descent from the same common ancestor; each clan would have a representative and a vote in all important councils held by the band (compare: Anishinaabe clan system).
Each band remained independent of each other.
However, Cree-speaking bands tended to work together and with their neighbours against outside enemies.
Those Cree who moved onto the Great Plains and adopted bison hunting, called the Plains Cree, were allied with the Assiniboine and the Saulteaux in what was known as the "Iron Confederacy" which was a major force in the North American fur trade from the 1730s to the 1870s.
When a band went to war, they would nominate a temporary military commander, called a "okimahkan".
loosely translated as "war chief".
This office was different from that of the "peace chief", a leader who had a role more like that of diplomat.
In the run-up to the 1885 North-West Rebellion, Big Bear was the leader of his band, but once the fighting started Wandering Spirit became war leader.
========,2,Name.
The name "Cree" is derived from the Algonkian-language exonym "Kirištino˙", which the Ojibwa used for tribes around Hudson Bay.
The French colonists and explorers, who spelled the term "Kilistinon", "Kiristinon", "Knisteneaux", "Cristenaux", and "Cristinaux", used the term for numerous tribes which they encountered north of Lake Superior, in Manitoba, and west of there.
The French used these terms to refer to various groups of peoples in Canada, some of which are now better distinguished as Severn Anishinaabe (Ojibwa), who speak dialects different from the Algonquin.
Depending on the community, the Cree may call themselves by the following names: the "nēhiyawak", "nīhithaw", "nēhilaw", and "nēhinaw"; or "ininiw", "ililiw", "iynu" ("innu"), or "iyyu".
These names are derived from the historical autonym "nēhiraw" (uncertain meaning) or from the historical autonym "iriniw" (meaning "person").
Cree using the latter autonym tend to be those living in the territories of Quebec and Labrador.
========,2,Language.
The Cree language (also known in the most broad classification as Cree-Montagnais, Cree-Montagnais-Naskapi, to show the groups included within it) is the name for a group of closely related Algonquian languages spoken by approximately 117,000 people across Canada, from the Northwest Territories to Labrador.
It is the most widely spoken aboriginal language in Canada.
The only region where Cree has official status is in the Northwest Territories, together with eight other aboriginal languages.
The two major groups: Nehiyaw and Innu, speak a mutually intelligible Cree dialect continuum, which can be divided by many criteria.
In a dialect continuum, "It is not so much a language, as a chain of dialects, where speakers from one community can very easily understand their neighbours, but a Plains Cree speaker from Alberta would find a Quebec Cree speaker difficult to speak to without practice."
One major division between the groups is that the Eastern group palatalizes the sound to either (c) or to (č) when it precedes front vowels.
There is also a major difference in grammatical vocabulary (particles) between the groups.
Within both groups, another set of variations has arisen around the pronunciation of the Proto-Algonquian phoneme *l, which can be realized as or (th) by different groups.
Yet in other dialects, the distinction between (ē) and (ī) has been lost, merging to the latter.
In more western dialects, the distinction between and (š) has been lost, both merging to the former.
Cree is a not a typologically harmonic language.
Cree has both prefixes and suffixes, both prepositions and postpositions, and both prenominal and postnominal modifiers (e.g.
demonstratives can appear in both positions).
Golla lists Cree as one of fifty five languages that have more than 1,000 speakers which are being actively acquired by children.
========,2,Identity and ethnicity.
========,3,In Canada.
The Cree are the largest group of First Nations in Canada, with 220,000 members and 135 registered bands.
This large population may be a result of the Crees' traditional openness to intertribal marriage.
Together, their reserve lands are the largest of any First Nations group in the country.
The largest Cree band and the second largest First Nations Band in Canada after the Six Nations Iroquois is the Lac La Ronge Band in northern Saskatchewan.
Given the traditional Cree acceptance of mixed marriages, it is acknowledged by academics that all bands are ultimately of mixed heritage and multilingualism and multiculturalism was the norm.
In the West mixed bands of Cree, Saulteaux and Assiniboine, all partners in the Iron Confederacy, are the norm.
However, in recent years, as indigenous languages have declined across western Canada where there were once three languages spoken on a given reserve, there may now only be one.
This has led to a simplification of identity, and it has become "fashionable" for bands in many parts of Saskatchewan to identify as "Plains Cree" at the expense of a mixed Cree-Salteaux history.
There is also a tendency for bands to recategorize themselves as "Plains Cree" instead of Woods Cree or Swampy Cree.
Neal McLeod argues this is partly due to the dominant culture's fascination with Plains Indian culture as well as the greater degree of written standardization and prestige Plains Cree enjoys over other Cree dialects.
The Métis (from the French, "Métis" - of mixed ancestry) are people of mixed ancestry, such as Nehiyaw (or Anishinaabe) and French, English, or Scottish heritage.
According to Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, the Métis were historically the children of French fur traders and Nehiyaw women or, from unions of English or Scottish traders and northern Dene women (Anglo-Métis).
Generally in academic circles, the term métis can be used to refer to any combination of persons of mixed Native American and European heritage, although historical definitions for Métis remain.
Canada's Indian and Northern Affairs broadly define Métis as those persons of mixed First Nation and European ancestry, while The Métis National Council defines a Métis as "a person who self-identifies as Métis, is distinct from other Aboriginal peoples, is of historic Métis Nation Ancestry and who is accepted by the Métis Nation".
========,3,In the United States.
At one time the Cree lived in northern Minnesota, North Dakota and Montana.
Today American Cree are enrolled in the federally recognized Chippewa Cree tribe, located on the Rocky Boy Indian Reservation, and in minority as "Landless Cree" on the Fort Peck Indian Reservation and as "Landless Cree" and "Rocky Boy Cree" on the Fort Belknap Indian Reservation, all in Montana.
The Chippewa Cree share the reservation with the Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians, who form the "Chippewa" (Ojibwa) half of the Chippewa Cree tribe.
On the other Reservations, the Cree minority share the Reservation with the Assiniboine, Gros Ventre and Sioux tribes.
Traditionally, the southern limits of the Cree territory in Montana were the Missouri River and the Milk River.
