========,1,preface.
Mister Magoo's Christmas Carol is a musical adaptation of Charles Dickens's famous short story "A Christmas Carol" starring the cartoon character Mr. Magoo.
Aside from the 1950 marionette special "The Spirit of Christmas", it was the first animated holiday program ever produced specifically for television, originally airing in December 1962, and the only one until the stop-motion special "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" was first shown in December 1964.
The special also inspired the 1964 TV series "The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo".
It featured the voice of Jim Backus as Magoo, with voice-over appearances by Paul Frees, Morey Amsterdam, Joan Gardner, and Jack Cassidy.
========,2,Overview.
"Mister Magoo's Christmas Carol" was produced by Henry G. Saperstein and the UPA animation studio in its declining days.
Commissioned and sponsored by Timex, it first aired on NBC on December 18, 1962.
Although the special led to "The Famous Adventures of Mr. Magoo" television series, the studio ultimately found it could not adapt to the rigors of mass-producing cartoons for television.
The program was broadcast as a TV special many times during the Christmas season from the 1960s through the 1980s—though not always on NBC—before being released on VHS in 1982 and on DVD in 2001.
The original 53-minute running time is often cut to make room for additional commercials, primarily by removing the framing device about Magoo himself.
For the 2012 holiday season, NBC, which last telecast it in 1969, announced it would return the special to the air for the first time since the 1980s; it aired on NBC on December 22, 2012 even though it was heavily edited for the addition of more commercials including opening and closing wraparounds scenes, the finale scene of the musical as well as the end credits and other crucial scenes being cut from broadcast.
The CW acquired the broadcast rights to the special for the 2014 season which was originally broadcast in its entirety but for the 2015 season broadcast the heavily edited NBC version instead.
========,2,Reception.
Audiences and critics consider this program to be a holiday classic, due in part to the original songs of the Broadway team of Jule Styne (music) and Bob Merrill (lyrics), who collaborated on the musical "Funny Girl" soon after their work on the special.
As recently as December 25, 2006, many listeners told the National Public Radio program "Talk of the Nation" that Mister Magoo was their favorite Ebenezer Scrooge.
========,2,Comparison with the book.
The credits for the cartoon state that it is "freely adapted" from "A Christmas Carol" by Charles Dickens.
This adaptation mostly serves to shorten the story to fit the television special's one-hour time slot.
The Ghost of Christmas Present appears before the Ghost of Christmas Past, and no reference is made to Scrooge's nephew Fred or the metaphorical children Ignorance and Want.
Nor is Scrooge's sister, Fan, seen in the Christmas Past sequence.
Two of the post-redemption scenes from the book are rewritten and combined, so that Scrooge visits the Cratchits instead of Fred, and threatens Bob (as a self-mocking prelude to raising his salary) at home rather than waiting to do so at work the following day.
At the same time, however, the remaining scenes are remarkably faithful to the original, with characters often speaking the lines as Dickens wrote them, and little or no simplification of the language to suit a younger or less literate audience living over a century later, as there is in Patrick Stewart's made-for-TV version.
A number of references to Scrooge's (i.e., Magoo's) poor vision are sprinkled through the story, a nod to the Magoo character, but except for the beginning and ending pieces which occur outside the framework of the Dickens story, there are none of the usual Magoo catastrophes.
========,2,Cast of voices.
Note that sources differ on credits for the Eye Patch Man, Laundress, Charwoman, 3 Cratchit children at table, Dick Wilkins, Boy that gets turkey, and the Ghost of Christmas Past, with June Foray sometimes credited for female voices.
However, Foray has stated on several occasions that she was not in the show at all.
Other sources credit Joan Gardner as the Ghost of Christmas Past.
========,2,Songs.
The cartoon's framing device consists almost entirely of Jim Backus as Quincy Magoo singing "It's Great To Be Back On Broadway", thus explaining in song that the character Magoo is portraying a character in a Broadway theatre production.
"Ringle, Ringle", Scrooge's theme song about "coins when they mingle", is half-sung by Jim Backus as Magoo, and serves to delineate the character's change of heart.
Initially he appreciates the coins aesthetically and for the wealth they represent, while Jack Cassidy as Bob Cratchit sings in counterpoint that "it's cold, it's frightfully cold", and musically begs Scrooge to spare the expense of "just one piece of coal" to warm him.
Later, in a musical reprise, Scrooge sings that the coins are "meant for passing around" as he spends the coins to help the Cratchit family.
Joan Gardner as Tiny Tim ("played" by the animated character Gerald McBoing-Boing) sings of "razzleberry dressing" and "woofle jelly cake" in "The Lord's Bright Blessing".
The Cratchit children's requests for better food, a tree and presents are countered by Jack Cassidy as Bob Cratchit singing of what the family has, in his view: "the Lord's bright blessing, and knowing we're together" - a togetherness that Scrooge lacks.
In the Christmas Past sequence, Backus/Magoo as Scrooge sings in poignant duet with Scrooge's younger self (sung by Marie Matthews), left behind in boarding school after all the other children have gone home for Christmas.
"In perhaps the most touching moment... Magoo is transported back to his childhood, where he stands side-by-side with his youthful self.
He watches his 'child' self sing Alone in the World, tracing his hand on the blackboard, hoping to find a hand of his own to hold... the quavering elderly voice blending with the clear, sweet youthful one, the invisible Magoo putting a transparent arm around his 'child' [self]."
Jane Kean as Belle performs the love ballad "Winter Was Warm", which also serves as a leitmotif throughout the special, and is heard during the end credits sung by a studio choir.
Veteran voice actor Paul Frees sings two roles in "We're Despicable (Plunderer's March)".
The laundress, charwoman, and the undertaker go to Old Joe's rag & bone shop to sell the items that they have taken from the newly deceased miser "with him lyin' there", and gleefully cackle their way through such lyrics as, "We're rep-re-hensible.
We'll steal your pen-and-pencible".
Backus sings a short reprise of "Alone in the World" in the scene where the Ghost of Christmas-Yet-to-Come abandons Scrooge in the cemetery.
For the finale, Scrooge and the Cratchits sing a reprise (with happier lyrics) of "The Lord's Bright Blessing".
A longstanding story suggests that "People" was originally written for "Mr. Magoo", but Theodore Taylor's biography of Styne disputes this.
The Cleveland Plain Dealer also disputes this, saying "Producer Lee Orgel heard Styne playing the piano.
He thought the song was sensational and asked if it was a solo for Magoo's Scrooge.
Styne and Merrill told him it was for "Funny Girl."
It was 'People', which would become a huge hit for Barbra Streisand."
========,2,In popular culture.
Baltimore-based rock group Animal Collective titled their debut album Spirit They're Gone, Spirit They've Vanished after a line in the movie spoken by Mr. Magoo.
"Mister Magoo's Christmas Carol" was parodied in "The Simpsons" episode "'Tis the Fifteenth Season" as Mr. McGrew's Christmas Carol.
