========,1,preface.
Dom John V (Portuguese: João V; 22 October 1689 – 31 July 1750), known as the Magnanimous (Portuguese: "o Magnânimo") and the Portuguese Sun King (Portuguese: "o Rei-Sol Português"), was a monarch of the House of Braganza who ruled as King of Portugal and the Algarves during the first half of the 18th century.
John V's reign saw the rise of the prestige of Portugal and its monarchy, which had been in decline among European courts, to a new level of prosperity and wealth.
John V's reign saw an enormous influx of gold into the coffers of the royal treasury, supplied largely by the royal fifth (a tax on precious metals) that was received from the Portuguese colonies of Brazil and Maranhão.
John nearly depleted his country's tax revenues on ambitious architectural works, most notably Mafra Palace, and on commissions and additions for his sizable art and literary collections.
Owing to his craving for international diplomatic recognition, John also spent large sums on the embassies he sent to the courts of Europe, the most famous being those he sent to Paris in 1715 and Rome in 1716.
Disregarding traditional Portuguese institutions of governance, John V ruled as an absolute monarch.
As a continuation of a Braganza dynasty policy that stressed the importance of relations with Europe, John's reign was marked by numerous interventions into the affairs of other European states, most notably as part of the War of the Spanish Succession.
On the imperial front, John V pursued an expansionist policy, with significant territorial gains in Portuguese India and Portuguese America.
John V was a very pious man who devoted large parts of his day to prayer and religious study.
He rewarded his long-awaited recognition as a lawful monarch by Pope Benedict XIV with a fervent devotion to the Catholic Church and some very large donations to the Holy See.
The Pope granted John V the style "Most Faithful Majesty," which appealed to him greatly.
However, John's relationship with the papacy varied at different periods in his reign; there were both close relations and conflicts at different times during the reigns of five different popes.
========,2,Early life.
John was born on 22 October 1689 at Ribeira Palace in Lisbon to King Pedro II and Queen Maria Sofia of Neuburg.
He was baptized on November 19 at the Royal Palace Chapel and given the name "João Francisco António José Bento Bernardo".
John was not his father's first son; he had an older brother, João, Prince of Brazil (after whom he was named), who died a year before John's birth, thus the court was overjoyed to have a new male heir to the kingdom.
Upon his baptism, John was not given the traditional titles of the heir apparent to the Portuguese throne, Prince of Brazil and Duke of Braganza, but merely the default title Infante of Portugal.
This was intended as a sign of respect for his elder brother's death, which had happened only months before.
========,3,Education.
John had a stimulating upbringing surrounded by some of the most brilliant minds of Europe at the time.
It was agreed by the court that John's care as a child was to be strictly run by women only, a custom of the Portuguese court, and the Portuguese nobility as a whole.
John's governess (who was later the governess for all of the sons of Pedro II) was Maria de Lencastre, the Marquise of Unhão, who was given that position more for her beauty and status than for her suitability as a child care giver.
The political policies of John's father had made the Portuguese court wealthy, the national economy stable, and the imperial military strong.
This made a richly varied and interesting childhood possible for John.
As a child, he was under the tutelage and heavy influence of the Jesuit Fathers Francisco da Cruz, John Seco, and Luís Gonzaga.
Father Luís Gonzaga was in charge of the education of all of King Pedro's children; he taught them military education, politics, astronomy, nautical studies, mathematics, and history.
As the prince grew up, he was mentored in political affairs by Luís da Cunha, a prominent Portuguese diplomat.
========,3,Maturity.
When John reached age seven, his father determined that his eldest sons were sufficiently educated in basic subjects and decided to take over supervision of their instruction himself, though his interest in mentoring them quickly faded.
This was formalised when he and his brother Francisco, Duke of Beja, were admitted into the Order of Christ on 7 April 1696.
Later that year, the king finally decided to confer on John the titles of the heir apparent, namely Prince of Brazil and Duke of Braganza.
On 1 December 1696, on the anniversary of the Portuguese Restoration War of 1640, a grand ceremony was held in which John was invested with his titles.
The ceremony involved the placing of a large ermine and red velvet mantle on his shoulders, as well as the adornment of his person with various jewels and royal regalia.
Just over a month before John's tenth birthday in 1699, his mother Queen Maria Sofia died at the age of 33.
This caused John to retreat from court and become depressed for many months.
Catherine of Braganza, his aunt and the former Queen consort of England, Scotland, and Ireland, returned to Portugal to help John revitalise himself and take control of his education.
She resided in the palace she had built, Bemposta Palace, and remained John's main tutor and female role model until her death in 1705.
In April 1700, John fell terribly ill; it was assumed that he was on his death bed.
Fearing his imminent demise, he asked for his last rites and confessed his sins.
To everyone's surprise, he rallied and soon returned to his normal activities, his complete recovery being considered a miracle by the court.
The death of John's sister Teresa Maria in February 1704, greatly saddened him.
It caused him to avoid appearing at court for some months and to estrange himself from his father, who favoured John's younger brother, Manuel, Count of Ourém.
During this time, much gossip was spread and worries arose about whether John would ever recover from his depression.
In May of that year, he eventually returned to the court and reconciled with the king, saying that his saudades for his sister would not get in the way of his performing his duty to the king.
========,2,Succession.
In early December 1706, Pedro II moved himself to the Royal Quinta at Alcântara, as he was growing ill and needed space from the court.
On the fifth of that month, the king caught a high fever, and the court doctors met to examine him fully.
They determined his health was greatly deteriorating.
The next day, Pedro II called all of his children to his bedside and told them of his coming demise.
He appointed John as prince regent of the kingdom and asked that all of his children follow John's wishes.
Although he appointed John the prince regent, Pedro II still favoured his youngest son Manuel, and the king gave Manuel a special gift that no other child received.
========,3,Acclamation.
King Pedro II died in his sleep on 9 December 1706.
Following his death, Ribeira Palace was redecorated as a reflection of the mourning.
On the façade towards the Terreiro do Paço, large black banners were hung from the windows for this purpose.
A month later, the time was declared to be appropriate for John to be acclaimed king.
Preparations for John's acclamation had already been started and once allowed, the royal palace was redecorated; the black banners were replaced with red ones, and fruit wreaths were hung throughout all of the palace.
On the day of John's acclamation, 1 January 1707, his new throne was placed on the balcony of the "Torre do Rei" (Tower of the King) of Ribeira Palace.
Specially-made tapestries illustrating the allegories of Justice and Prudence were hung high above the Terreiro do Paço to remind the public that these were the traits their king would have.
Once John sat down on his throne, wreaths made of gold were laid around the throne and balcony.
Wearing his Cross of the Order of Christ, and with the Portuguese Crown Jewels beside him, and not on him, as was the Portuguese royal custom, John was acclamed "His Majesty, by the Grace of God, King of Portugal and the Algarves, before and beyond the sea in Africa, Lord of Guinea and of Conquest, Navigation, and Commerce of Ethiopia, Arabia, Persia, and India, our Lord, John, the fifth of that name in the table of the Kings of Portugal."
John was now king of an empire that stretched four continents.
He was also the head of state of a kingdom that was at war with Spain and France.
His first regnal act was to renew Portugal's membership in the League of Augsburg and continue in the war alongside the United Kingdom and the Habsburgs.
Portugal quickly supplied more troops to aid her allies in the war.
This new level of Portuguese involvement allowed John's general, António Luís de Sousa, Marquis of Minas, to capture Madrid on 28 June 1706.
While Portugal put vast resources into the war, contrary to John's predecessors, who avoided conflicts in Europe, activity in the war soon lost the interest of the king, who had more pressing affairs to attend to.
========,3,Marriage.
During his life, Pedro II had worked a long time to secure John a marriage with an Austrian archduchess in order to guarantee Portugal's alliance with the Habsburgs.
John continued these negotiations and finally succeeded in negotiating a deal.
On 27 June 1707, Fernão Teles da Silva, Count of Vilar Maior, signed a marriage contract with Holy Emperor Joseph I that made official a match between John and the emperor's sister, the Archduchess Maria Anna of Austria.
The contract also set the archduchess's dowry at 100,000 crowns, a vast sum for the day.
The armada that Portugal sent to escort Maria Anna from the Lower Countries to Lisbon arrived in the Tagus river estuary on 26 October 1708.
The flagship, in which Maria Anna travelled, berthed at the docks of the private garden of Ribeira Palace, where John and a party of the kingdom's richest and most powerful nobles met the new queen for the first time.
The marriage celebrations lasted until 27 December; they were sumptuous and very costly.
By late 1710, John and Maria Anna had not produced an heir to the throne.
It had been two years since the couple had been married, and the court was starting to question the future of the House of Braganza.
In early 1711, the king met with Franciscan Cardinal Nuno da Cunha e Ataíde, High Inquisitor of the Portuguese Inquisition, who told him that if he promised God to build a Franciscan convent in Mafra, God would deliver his long desired heir.
Accordingly, John promised that if Maria Anna became pregnant before the end of 1711, he would build a Franciscan convent in Mafra.
John's wish would come true later that year, when Maria Anna fulfilled her duty as queen and gave birth to the Infanta Maria Barbara of Braganza on 4 December 1711.
John and Maria Anna had a successful marriage, but lived largely separate lives.
Maria Anna devoted herself to preserving the decorum of the royal court and her own religious interests, while John concerned himself with whatever pleased him at the moment.
John kept many mistresses throughout his royal career, including Filipa de Noronha, Paula de Odivelas, Luísa Inês Antónia Machado Monteiro, Madalena Máxima de Miranda, Inácia Rosa de Távora, and Luísa Clara de Portugal.
========,3,Offspring.
Maria Barbara's birth was followed by the birth of Pedro, Prince of Brazil, on 19 October 1712, which temporarily gave John a male heir.
Prince Pedro's death on 29 October 1714 greatly saddened him, but he took solace in the fact that his son, the Infante José (now Prince José), had been born on June 6 earlier that same year.
Following the birth of Prince José, John and Maria Anna would have three more children: Infante Carlos, born 2 May 1716, Infante Pedro, born 5 July 1717, and Infante Alexandre, born 24 September 1723.
Of the last three infantes, only two would survive to adulthood, Infante Carlos and Infante Pedro; only one would continue the Braganza line: Infante Pedro.
John's children were trained rigorously growing up.
His plan was to have an intelligent son who could take his place as king, a strategically married daughter, and well-prepared statesmen sons; but he would achieve only part of his goal.
From her birth, Infanta Maria Barbara's marriage had been closely arranged and monitored by John.
When the engagement of Mariana Victoria of Spain to Louis XV of France was nullified, John proposed Infanta Maria Barbara as a possible bride for Louis XV, but in the end she was refused.
John still managed to gain something from the dissolution of the engagement between Louis XV and Mariana Victoria, i.e., a wife for his son Prince José and a husband for Infanta Maria Barbara, Mariana Victoria's older brother Fernando, Prince of Asturias.
Negotiations between Portugal and Spain began in 1725, and four years later John's eldest children would be matched with their spouses-to-be.
The princesses Maria Barbara and Mariana Victoria were exchanged at a ceremony, called the Exchange of the Princesses ("Troca das Princesas"), held on the Caia River on 19 January 1729.
Prince José married Mariana Victoria on 19 January 1729 in Elvas, and Infanta Maria Barbara married Prince Fernando on 20 January 1729 in Badajoz.
None of John's three other sons would marry in his lifetime.
Infante Alexandre died at the age of five, and Infante Carlos died at the age of twenty without any marriage proposals or children.
Only Infante Pedro would live long enough to marry, but John did not live long enough to see it.
Infante Pedro married the daughter of his older brother King José I, Princess Maria Francisca, Princess of Brazil, on 6 June 1760.
When Princess Maria became Queen Maria I of Portugal upon the death of her father, King José I (John's son), Prince Pedro became King Pedro III, following Portuguese royal law that if the consort of a queen regnant produced children with the queen regnant, he would become king of Portugal "jure uxoris".
John fathered at least four children from various extramarital affairs: António of Braganza, by Luísa Inês Antónia Machado Monteiro, Gaspar of Braganza, Archbishop of Braga, by Madalena Máxima de Miranda, José of Braganza, High Inquisitor of Portugal, by Paula de Odivelas, and Maria Rita of Braganza, by Luísa Clara de Portugal.
Out of his four illegitimate children, the three males were all recognized as John's sons and were collectively known as the Children of Palhavã, after the Palace of Palhavã that belonged to Luís Carlos Inácio Xavier de Meneses, 1st Marquis of Louriçal, where they lived at John's expense.
The Children of Palhavã received educations worthy of nobility and went on to become noteworthy members of the clergy.
Maria Rita was never officially recognized as his daughter, but he informally arranged for her life at the Convent of Santos and managed her expenses.
The husband of Maria Rita's mother, Jorge de Meneses, attempted to stop John's actions for Maria Rita, but the king had him exiled to Spain and then to England.
========,2,Regnal politics.
When John became king, he chose to reign as an absolute monarch.
Notably, he never convened the Portuguese Cortes, the ancient parliament of the three estates in Portugal, and actively ignored meetings of the Council of State.
However, John did not act by himself when making decisions; rather, he frequently consulted a close circle of well-informed advisers and held weekly intimate audiences with members of all three estates, which he preferred to larger institutions, such as the Cortes and the Council of State, which he viewed as incompetent and bloated.
The Count of Povolide remarked on John's governance style, stating that "he established a predominance of personal consultation over institutional consultation."
========,3,His Majesty's Government.
The highest position in the king's government was that of Secretary of State of Portugal, the equivalent of a modern-day prime minister.
This position was always filled by a favourite of John, the most notable one Diogo de Mendonça Corte-Real, whom the king consulted with on every matter, to such a degree that it often appeared that he was the king's only minister.
When John became king, he inherited a powerful and large Council of State made up of numerous bishops, nobles, and bureaucrats, which was charged with being the utmost consultory body to the king, as it was during the reign of John's father.
However, John's dislike of institutions and consultative bodies led him to cease convening the council formally, leading the prominent politician and diplomat Luís da Cunha to refer to the king as a despot and his government as absolutist.
Although the Council of State was never convened, several of its members were nonetheless close advisers to the king.
Alongside Diogo de Mendonça Corte-Real, Cardinal João da Mota e Silva and High-Inquisitor Nuno da Cunha e Ataíde were close advisers to the king, the former eventually substituting Mendonça Corte-Real as Secretary of State when he died in 1736.
Though he disbanded most institutions, John notably maintained the Junta of the Three Estates, a governing junta created by John's grandfather, King John IV, which managed the finances and maintenance of military installations, troop raising, and taxation related to defense.
Having engaged in multiple conflicts throughout his reign, both in Europe and his empire, John understood the necessity of the junta and carefully picked its members, only selecting those deemed the most knowledgeable and competent.
Similarly, John maintained the Council of the Treasury, which managed the finances of Portugal and its empire, including tax collection and budget accounting for the majority of Portugal's organizations (notably excusing the military), and exerted authority over the Casa da Índia, the Royal Mint, and the custom houses across Portuguese territory.
========,3,European relations.
When John ascended the throne, he found himself entangled in the War of the Spanish Succession, as King Pedro II had signed the Methuen Treaty in 1703, which aligned Portugal to the Grand Alliance against the House of Bourbon and allowed Grand Alliance forces to launch their invasion of Spain from Portugal.
Only months after assuming the throne, John saw his forces overwhelmingly defeated in at the Battle of Almansa, a defeat that jeopardized Portuguese forces in Spain and the outcome of the war.
Portuguese forces continued to fight alongside the Grand Alliance until agreeing to an armistice with Spain and France on 8 November 1712.
The war finally came to an end in 1713 with the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht, whereby Portugal regained possession of territories conquered by the Bourbon coalition and acquired new territories in South America.
With the War of the Spanish Succession ended, John could re-establish relations with the courts of Europe.
His first grand act of diplomacy was the dispatch of Luís Manuel da Câmara, 3rd Count of Ribeira Grande, as his ambassador to the court of Louis XIV of France, in early August 1715.
The grandson of François, Prince of Soubise, and cousin of Hercule Mériadec, Prince of Guéméné, Câmara was personally chosen by John to foster amicable relations with the French court.
No expense was spared on the count's triumphal entry into Paris, which cost 100 Louis d'or and received such great applause from the people of Paris that Alexandre de Gusmão, the count's secretary, stated that "the Count of Ribeira Grande has eternalized the grandness of our generous king."
Although King Louis would die only weeks after the Portuguese embassy's arrival to France, the richness and extravagance of its entry to Paris was noted at the French court and across Europe and gained a new level of prestige for John and his kingdom.
As John concerned himself with the presentation of Portugal at the court of Europe from home through the planning and organization of important embassies, the king's brother, Infante Manuel, Count of Ourém, was similarly raising the name of Portugal throughout Europe.
Having left the country in 1715 without the king's permission (as was required for royalty and high nobility), the Count of Ourém traveled throughout Europe, staying with Portuguese ambassadors and nobles across the continent, causing quite a fanfare.
Although the king was displeased that Manuel left without permission, the king forgave the infante, writing to Manuel "your age absolves your mistake".
Now having the king's permission, Infante Manuel entered the service of Prince Eugene of Savoy, serving alongside him at the successful Battle of Petrovaradin.
Over the next 17 years, the Count of Ourém moved from court to court as a celebrity and military hero and was even considered as a candidate as King of Poland by provision of the 1732 Treaty of the Three Black Eagles.
Manuel's adventures throughout the continent inspired several literary works and gained him celebrity, raising Portugal's prestige in the eyes of Europe.
========,3,Catholic Church.
In response to a request by Pope Clement XI to John for aid in the fight against the Turks, the king sent an armada of Portuguese ships in 1716 to assist Venice and Austria in their conflicts with the Turks that was led by his brother, Infante Francisco, Duke of Beja, and Lopo Furtado de Mendonça, Count of Rio Grande.
In the same year, John ordered a formal, triumphal entry for his ambassador in Rome, Rodrigo Anes de Sá Almeida e Meneses, Marquis of Fontes.
Seeking to mimic the response received at the French court, 5,000 cruzados were spent on a luxurious entry for the Portuguese envoy.
The ceremonial procession included a convoy of 300 carriages surrounding the "pièce de résistance" of the procession, the Oceans Coach, an ornate carriage made in Lisbon to demonstrate the wealth of the Portuguese empire to Rome.
Having impressed the papal court, Pope Clement XI raised the dignity of the Archdiocese of Lisbon to the Patriarchate of Lisbon, making the Portuguese capital only one of two dioceses with this title in Europe, alongside Venice.
John's good fortune with the papacy and Italy would continue to raise the next year, in 1717, when the aid of a Portuguese squadron of ships helped win the Battle of Matapan, in the ongoing Ottoman-Venetian War.
========,2,Joanine culture.
========,3,Mafra.
John is often remembered as one of the greatest patrons of the arts in Portuguese history, having commissioned numerous construction projects and artistic studies.
The king's most famous and important work was the Palace-Convent of Mafra.
In early 1711, married to Maria Anna of Austria for three years and without an heir, John grew worried for the future of the House of Braganza.
He met with D. Nuno da Cunha e Ataíde, High-Inquisitor of Portugal, who assured the king that if he promised to build a convent for Franciscans in Mafra, in the Lisbon countryside, Maria Anna would bear him a child by the end of 1711.
John agreed to do so.
Construction started in 1717, with plans for a modest church convent for one hundred friars.
However, in the following years, with a gratuitous flow of gold from the American colonies of Brazil and Maranhão, the plans were altered to become a "magnum opus" of John's reign, accommodating three hundred friars and adjusted to become a hybrid convent-palace, including a royal library, a basilica, and a vast set of apartments for the royal family.
Noting the vast size and scope of the project, Charles de Merveilleux, a Swiss nobleman living in Portugal in 1726, remarked that "King John has decided to build a second Escorial."
With the new plans for a palatial complex, the project at Mafra, entrusted to royal architect João Frederico Ludovice, became much more than a fulfillment of a religious promise, but rather a demonstration of monarchical power and wealth.
By 1729, 15,470 workers from throughout Portugal and its colonies were contributing to the construction of the palace, alongside a total of 6,124 infantrymen and cavalrymen, making a total of 21,594 persons involved in the building process and site that year.
While the majority of the palace was completed by 1730, John was so consumed in completing the project that he decreed it mandatory for all inhabitants of the villages of Mafra and Ericeira to work at the palace, requiring an excused permission not to participate, and only under extraordinary circumstances.
In regard to the exuberant cost of the palatial complex, Merveilleux remarked that "three quarters of the royal treasury and nearly all of the gold brought on the fleets from Brazil were here, at Mafra, turned into stone."
Mafra stood as a monument to regal power, even though it would become only a pleasure palace and never a seat of authority.
John commissioned numerous operas, comedies, and serenades to be celebrated at the palace with great pomp, and its enormous property became the favoured hunting grounds of the royal family for centuries to come.
The king also began to celebrate his birthday annually at Mafra, starting in 1732.
John housed one of the largest and most sumptuous libraries in Europe within the palace, with over 36,000 volumes dating from the 14th to the 18th centuries.
Works at Mafra would continue until 1755, when the devastation wreaked by the Great Lisbon earthquake required as many workers as possible to rebuild the city.
