========,1,preface.
A gravitational singularity or space-time singularity is a location in space-time where the gravitational field of a celestial body becomes infinite in a way that does not depend on the coordinate system.
The quantities used to measure gravitational field strength are the scalar invariant curvatures of space-time, which includes a measure of the density of matter.
Since such quantities become infinite within the singularity, the laws of normal space-time cannot exist.
A gravitational singularity as predicted by general relativity is at the center of a black hole: any star collapsing beyond a certain point (the Schwarzschild radius) would form a black hole, inside which a singularity (covered by an event horizon) would be formed.
The Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems define a singularity to have geodesics that cannot be extended in a smooth manner.
The termination of such a geodesic is considered to be the singularity.
According to modern general relativity, the initial state of the universe, at the beginning of the Big Bang, was a singularity.
Both general relativity and quantum mechanics break down in describing the earliest moments of the Big Bang, but in general, quantum mechanics does not permit particles to inhabit a space smaller than their wavelengths.
========,2,Interpretation.
Many theories in physics have mathematical singularities of one kind or another.
Equations for these physical theories predict that the ball of mass of some quantity becomes infinite or increases without limit.
This is generally a sign for a missing piece in the theory, as in the Ultraviolet Catastrophe, re-normalization, and instability of a hydrogen atom predicted by the Larmor formula.
Some theories, such as the theory of loop quantum gravity suggest that singularities may not exist.
The idea can be stated in the form that due to quantum gravity effects, there is a minimum distance beyond which the force of gravity no longer continues to increase as the distance between the masses becomes shorter, or alternatively that interpenetrating particle waves mask gravitational effects that would be felt at a distance.
========,2,Types.
There are different types of singularities, each with different physical features which have characteristics relevant to the theories in which they originally emerged from, such as the different shape of the singularities, "conical and curved".
They have also been hypothesized to occur without Event Horizons, structures which delineate, one space-time section from another in which events cannot affect past the horizon, these are called "naked."
========,3,Conical.
A conical singularity occurs when there is a point where the limit of every diffeomorphism invariant quantity is finite, in which case space-time is not smooth at the point of the limit itself.
Thus, space-time looks like a cone around this point, where the singularity is located at the tip of the cone.
The metric can be finite everywhere if a suitable coordinate system is used.
An example of such a conical singularity is a cosmic string and a Schwarzschild black hole.
========,3,Curvature.
Solutions to the equations of general relativity or another theory of gravity (such as supergravity) often result in encountering points where the metric blows up to infinity.
However, many of these points are completely regular, and the infinities are merely a result of using an inappropriate coordinate system at this point.
In order to test whether there is a singularity at a certain point, one must check whether at this point diffeomorphism invariant quantities (i.e.
scalars) become infinite.
Such quantities are the same in every coordinate system, so these infinities will not "go away" by a change of coordinates.
An example is the Schwarzschild solution that describes a non-rotating, uncharged black hole.
In coordinate systems convenient for working in regions far away from the black hole, a part of the metric becomes infinite at the event horizon.
However, space-time at the event horizon is regular.
The regularity becomes evident when changing to another coordinate system (such as the Kruskal coordinates), where the metric is perfectly smooth.
On the other hand, in the center of the black hole, where the metric becomes infinite as well, the solutions suggest a singularity exists.
The existence of the singularity can be verified by noting that the Kretschmann scalar, being the square of the Riemann tensor i.e.
***formula***, which is diffeomorphism invariant, is infinite.
While in a non-rotating black hole the singularity occurs at a single point in the model coordinates, called a "point singularity", in a rotating black hole, also known as a Kerr black hole, the singularity occurs on a ring (a circular line), known as a "ring singularity".
Such a singularity may also theoretically become a wormhole.
More generally, a space-time is considered singular if it is geodesically incomplete, meaning that there are freely-falling particles whose motion cannot be determined beyond a finite time, being after the point of reaching the singularity.
For example, any observer inside the event horizon of a non-rotating black hole would fall into its center within a finite period of time.
The classical version of the Big Bang cosmological model of the universe contains a causal singularity at the start of time ("t"=0), where all time-like geodesics have no extensions into the past.
Extrapolating backward to this hypothetical time 0 results in a universe with all spatial dimensions of size zero, infinite density, infinite temperature, and infinite space-time curvature.
========,2,Entropy.
Before Stephen Hawking came up with the concept of Hawking radiation, the question of black holes having entropy was avoided.
However, this concept demonstrates that black holes can radiate energy, which conserves entropy and solves the incompatibility problems with the second law of thermodynamics.
Entropy, however, implies heat and therefore temperature.
The loss of energy also suggests that black holes do not last forever, but rather "evaporate" slowly.
Small black holes tend to be hotter whereas larger ones tend to be colder.
All known black hole candidates are so large that their temperature is far below that of the cosmic background radiation, so they are all gaining energy.
They will not begin to lose energy until a cosmological redshift of more than one million is reached, rather than the thousand or so since the background radiation formed.
