========,1,preface.
A quisling (; ) is a term originating from Norway, which is used in Scandinavian languages and in English for a person who collaborates with an enemy occupying force – or more generally as a synonym for traitor.
The word originates from the surname of the Norwegian war-time leader Vidkun Quisling, who headed a domestic Nazi collaborationist regime during the Second World War.
========,2,Origin.
Use of Quisling's surname as a term predates the Second World War.
The first recorded use of the term was by Norwegian Labour Party politician Oscar Torp in a 2 January 1933 newspaper interview, where he used it as a general term for followers of Vidkun Quisling.
Quisling was at this point in the process of establishing the Nasjonal Samling (National Unity) party, a fascist party modelled on the German Nazi Party.
Further uses of the term were made by Aksel Sandemose, in a newspaper article in "Dagbladet" in 1934, and by the newspaper "Vestfold Arbeiderblad", in 1936.
========,2,Popularization in World War II.
The use of the term as a term for collaborators or traitors in general probably came about upon Quisling's unsuccessful coup d'etat in 1940, when he attempted to seize power and make Norway cease resisting the invading Germans.
The term was widely introduced to an English-speaking audience by the British newspaper "The Times".
It published an editorial on the 19th April 1940 titled "Quislings everywhere", in which it was asserted that "To writers, the word Quisling is a gift from the gods.
If they had been ordered to invent a new word for traitor... they could hardly have hit upon a more brilliant combination of letters.
Aurally it contrives to suggest something at once slippery and tortuous."
The "Daily Mail" picked up the term four days after "The Times" editorial was published.
In the article "The War Illustrated" "potential Quislings" among the Dutch during the German invasion of the Netherlands were mentioned.
Subsequently, the BBC brought the word into common use internationally.
The then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Winston Churchill used the term during an address to the Allied Delegates at St. James's Palace on 21 June 1941, when he said: "A vile race of Quislings—to use a new word which will carry the scorn of mankind down the centuries—is hired to fawn upon the conqueror, to collaborate in his designs and to enforce his rule upon their fellow countrymen while grovelling low themselves."
He used the term again in an address to both houses of Congress in the United States of America on 26 December 1941.
Commenting upon the effect of a number of Allied victories against Axis forces, and moreover the United States’ decision to enter the war, Churchill opined: "Hope has returned to the hearts of scores of millions of men and women, and with that hope there burns the flame of anger against the brutal, corrupt invader.
And still more fiercely burn the fires of hatred and contempt for the filthy Quislings whom he has suborned."
The term subsequently entered the language and became a target for political cartoonists.
In the United States it was used often.
Some examples include: in the Warner Bros. film "Edge of Darkness" (1943), in reference to a traitorous villager, and in the Warner Bros. cartoon "Tom Turk and Daffy" (1944), uttered by a Thanksgiving turkey whose presence is betrayed to Porky Pig by Daffy Duck.
In the American film "Edge of Darkness" (1943), about the Resistance in Norway, the heroine's brother is often described as a quisling.
========,3,Verb form.
The back-formed verb, "to quisle" () existed.
This back-formed verb gave rise to a much less common version of the noun: "quisler".
However, H. L. Mencken (generally considered to be a leading authority on the common English usage in the United States) even in 1944 appeared not to be aware of the existence of the verb form, and "to quisle" has largely disappeared from contemporary usage.
========,2,Postwar use.
"Quisling" was applied to some Communist figures who participated in the establishment of Communist regimes.
As an illustration, the renegade socialist Zdeněk Fierlinger of Czechoslovakia was frequently derided as "Quislinger" for his collaboration with the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia.
The noun has survived into the 21st century and is still in some use.
It appeared in 2008 and 2009 in articles in "The New York Times", "Die Zeit" and "The Times".
In 2016 "The Federalist" asked "Is Donald Trump A Russian Quisling?"
while "Politico", "The Hill", and other journals also resurrected the term that year in analyzing contemporary American politics.
