========,1,preface.
Untouchables is the fifth studio album by American nu metal band Korn.
The album was officially released on June 11, 2002 and featured the Grammy-winning single "Here to Stay".
"Untouchables" debuted at number two on the "Billboard" 200 with 434,000 copies sold during its first week, second only to Eminem's "The Eminem Show."
The album received positive reviews from music critics.
"Untouchables" was certified platinum on July 11, 2002.
"Untouchables" sold at least 1.4 million copies in the United States.
========,2,Conception.
Korn commenced writing "Untouchables" in early 2001.
Tension between band members grew and, in an effort to lessen their tensions and distractions, they continued writing in Scottsdale, Arizona, in hope that the new landscape would inspire them in writing songs.
They finished writing the album then went back to Los Angeles, California to begin recording.
Hostility between band members was still there.
During the tour, band members began to consider firing bassist Reginald "Fieldy" Arvizu due to his drug abuse problem, but decided against it.
"Untouchables" was recorded at Conway Studio, in Hollywood, California and The Village, in Los Angeles, California.
The album was produced by Michael Beinhorn and recorded by Frank Filipetti.
The album featured the same member line-up as their previous four studio albums.
It was mixed by Andy Wallace and mastered by Howie Weinberg.
On the album's release date, June 11, 2002, a single, "Here to Stay" was released by Sony Music Distribution.
The album was re-released on November 12, 2002, as a last-ditch effort to rejuvenate album sales, which had fallen shortly after the album's first week on the "Billboard" 200.
This limited edition features different artwork, and a bonus DVD, containing a live version of "Here to Stay", performance versions of the "Here to Stay" and "Thoughtless" music videos, and a live recording of "Got the Life".
In a 2013 interview with Scuzz, the band revealed that the total recording costs of "Untouchables" were estimated at $750,000 due to living expenses and keeping their 15-person crew on retainer for the nearly two years it took to finish the album.
========,2,Reception.
"Untouchables" sold over 434,000 copies in its first week, but did not surpass the sales from "The Eminem Show" by Eminem and came at number two on "Billboard".
Davis blamed Internet piracy for the drop in sales compared to previous albums, since the album had leaked onto file-sharing websites more than two months prior to its official release date.
"Untouchables" received mostly positive reviews from music critics.
At Metacritic, the album received a score of 80/100 based on 11 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
This meant that it was received much better by critics than their previous or later efforts.
