========,1,preface.
The House of Medici ( ; ) was an Italian banking family, political dynasty and later royal house that first began to gather prominence under Cosimo de' Medici in the Republic of Florence during the first half of the 15th century.
The family originated in the Mugello region of the Tuscan countryside, gradually rising until they were able to fund the Medici Bank.
The bank was the largest in Europe during the 15th century, seeing the Medici gain political power in Florence — though officially they remained citizens rather than monarchs.
The Medici produced three Popes of the Catholic Church—Pope Leo X (1513–1521), Pope Clement VII (1523–1534), and Pope Leo XI (1605); two regent queens of France—Catherine de' Medici (1547–1559) and Marie de' Medici (1600–1610).
In 1531, the family became hereditary Dukes of Florence.
In 1569, the duchy was elevated to a grand duchy after territorial expansion.
They ruled the Grand Duchy of Tuscany from its inception until 1737, with the death of Gian Gastone de' Medici.
The grand duchy witnessed degrees of economic growth under the earlier grand dukes, but by the time of Cosimo III de' Medici, Tuscany was fiscally bankrupt.
Their wealth and influence initially derived from the textile trade guided by the guild of the "Arte della Lana".
Like other families ruling in Italian "signorie", the Medicis dominated their city's government, were able to bring Florence under their family's power, and created an environment where art and humanism could flourish.
They, along with other families of Italy—such as the Visconti and Sforza of Milan, the Este of Ferrara, and the Gonzaga of Mantua—fostered and inspired the birth of the Italian Renaissance.
The Medici Bank was one of the most prosperous and most respected institutions in Europe.
There are some estimates that the Medici family were the wealthiest family in Europe for a time.
From this base, they acquired political power initially in Florence and later in wider Italy and Europe.
A notable contribution to the profession of accounting was the improvement of the general ledger system through the development of the double-entry bookkeeping system for tracking credits and debits.
The Medici family were among the earliest businesses to use the system.
========,2,History.
========,3,Origins.
The Medici family came from the agricultural Mugello region, north of Florence, being mentioned for the first time in a document of 1230.
The origin of the name is uncertain.
"Medici" is the plural of "medico", also written "del medico" or "delmedigo", meaning, "medical doctor".
It has been suggested that the name derived from one "Medico di Potrone", a castellan of Potrone in the late 11th century, who presumably was the family's ancestor.
The dynasty began with the founding of the Medici Bank.
========,3,Rise to power.
Until the late 14th century, prior to the Medici, the leading family of Florence was the House of Albizzi.
In 1293 the Ordinances of Justice were enacted, which effectively became the constitution of the republic of Florence throughout the Italian Renaissance.
The city's numerous luxurious palazzi were becoming surrounded by townhouses, built by the ever prospering merchant class.
In 1298, one of the leading banking families of Europe, the Bonsignoris, were bankrupted, so the city of Siena lost her status as the banking center of Europe to Florence.
The main challengers to the Albizzi family were the Medicis, first under Giovanni de' Medici, later under his son Cosimo di Giovanni de' Medici and great-grandson, Lorenzo de' Medici.
The Medici controlled the Medici bank—then Europe's largest bank—and an array of other enterprises in Florence and elsewhere.
In 1433, the Albizzi managed to have Cosimo exiled.
The next year, however, a pro-Medici Signoria was elected and Cosimo returned.
The Medici became the city's leading family, a position they would hold for the next three centuries.
Florence remained a republic until 1537, traditionally marking the end of the High Renaissance in Florence, but the instruments of republican government were firmly under the control of the Medici and their allies, save during intervals after 1494 and 1527.
Cosimo and Lorenzo rarely held official posts but were the unquestioned leaders.
The Medici family was connected to most other elite families of the time through marriages of convenience, partnerships, or employment, so the family had a central position in the social network: several families had systematic access to the rest of the elite families only through the Medici, perhaps similar to banking relationships.
Some examples of these families include the Bardi, Salviati, Cavalcanti, and the Tornabuoni.
This has been suggested as a reason for the rise of the Medici family.
Members of the family rose to some prominence in the early 14th century in the wool trade, especially with France and Spain.
Despite the presence of some Medici in the city's government institutions, they were still far less notable than other outstanding families such as the Albizzi or the Strozzi.
One Salvestro de' Medici was speaker of the woolmakers' guild during the Ciompi revolt, and one Antonio was exiled from Florence in 1396.
The involvement in another plot in 1400 caused all branches of the family to be banned from Florentine politics for twenty years, with the exception of two; one of those, Averardo de' Medici (1320–1363), originated the Medici dynasty.
========,3,15th century.
Averardo's son, Giovanni di Bicci de' Medici (c. 1360–1429), increased the wealth of the family through his creation of the Medici Bank, and became one of the richest men in the city of Florence.
Although he never held any political charge, he gained strong popular support for the family through his support for the introduction of a proportional taxing system.
Giovanni's son Cosimo the Elder, "Pater Patriae", took over in 1434 as gran maestro, and the Medici became unofficial heads of state of the Florentine republic.
Three successive generations of the Medici — Cosimo, Piero, and Lorenzo — ruled over Florence through the greater part of the 15th century, without altogether abolishing representative government but clearly dominating it.
These three members of the Medici family had great skills in the management of so "restive and independent a city" as Florence.
When Lorenzo died in 1492, however, his son Piero proved quite incapable, and within two years he and his supporters were forced into exile and were replaced with a republican government.
Piero de' Medici (1416–1469), Cosimo's son, stayed in power for only five years (1464–1469).
He was called "Piero the Gouty" because of the gout that afflicted his foot and eventually led to his death.
Unlike his father, Piero had little interest in the arts.
Due to his illness, he mostly stayed at home bedridden, and therefore did little to further the Medici control of Florence while in power.
As such, Medici rule stagnated until the next generation, when Piero's son Lorenzo took over.
Lorenzo de' Medici (1449–1492), called "the Magnificent", was more capable of leading and ruling a city, but he neglected the family banking business, leading to its ultimate ruin.
To ensure the continuance of his family's success, Lorenzo planned his children's future careers for them.
He groomed the headstrong Piero II to follow as his successor in civil leadership; Giovanni (future Pope Leo X) was placed in the church at an early age; and his daughter Maddalena was provided with a sumptuous dowry to make a politically advantageous marriage to a son of Pope Innocent VIII.
There was a conspiracy in 1478 to depose the family by killing Lorenzo with his younger brother Giuliano during Easter services; the assassination attempt ended with the death of Giuliano and an injured Lorenzo.
The conspiracy involved the Pazzi and Salviati families, who were both rival banking families seeking to end the Medici influence, as well as the priest presiding over the church services, the Archbishop of Pisa, and even Pope Sixtus IV to a degree.
The conspirators approached Sixtus IV in the hopes of gaining his approval, as he and the Medici had a long rivalry themselves, but the pope gave no official sanction to the plan.
Despite his refusal of official approval, the pope nonetheless allowed the plot to proceed without interfering, and, after the failed assassination of Lorenzo, also gave dispensation for crimes done in the service of the church.
After this, Lorenzo adopted his brother's illegitimate son, Giulio de' Medici (1478–1535), the future Clement VII.
Unfortunately, all of Lorenzo's careful planning fell apart to some degree under his incompetent son, Piero II, who took over as the head of Florence after his father's death.
Piero was responsible for the expulsion of the Medici from 1494–1512.
The Medici additionally benefited from the discovery of vast deposits of alum in Tolfa.
Alum is essential as a mordant in the dyeing of certain cloths and was used extensively in Florence, where the main industry was textile manufacturing.
However, the Turks were the only exporters of alum, so Europe was forced to buy from them until the discovery in the Italian town of Tolfa.
Pius II granted the Medici family a monopoly on the mining there, making them the primary producers of Alum in Europe.
========,3,16th century.
The exile of the Medici lasted until 1512, and the "senior" branch of the family — those descended from Cosimo the Elder — were then able to rule on and off until the assassination of Alessandro de' Medici, first Duke of Florence, in 1537.
This century-long rule was only interrupted on two occasions (between 1494–1512 and 1527–1530), when popular revolts sent the Medici into exile.
Power then passed to the "junior" Medici branch — those descended from Lorenzo the Elder, younger son of Giovanni di Bicci, starting with his great-great-grandson Cosimo I the Great.
The Medici's rise to power was chronicled in detail by Benedetto Dei.
Cosimo and his father started the Medici foundations in banking, manufacturing – including a form of franchises – wealth, art, cultural patronage, and in the Papacy that ensured their success for generations.
At least half, probably more, of Florence's people were employed by them and their foundational branches in business.
However, the Medici remained masters of Italy through their two famous 16th century popes, Leo X and Clement VII, who were "de facto" rulers of both Rome and Florence.
They were both patrons of the arts, but in the religious field they proved unable to stem the advance of Martin Luther's ideas.
Clement VII was the pope during the sack of Rome by Charles V, and later was forced to crown him.
Clement frequently changed his alliances between the Empire and France, which eventually led him to marry off his first cousin, twice removed, Catherine de' Medici, to the son of Francis I of France, the future Henry II.
This led to the Medici blood being transferred, through Catherine's daughters, to the royal family of Spain through Elisabeth of Valois, and the House of Lorraine through Claude of Valois.
The most outstanding figure of the 16th century Medici was Cosimo I, who, coming from relatively modest beginnings in the Mugello, rose to supremacy in the whole of Tuscany, conquering the Florentines' most hated rival Siena and founding the Grand Duchy of Tuscany.
Cosimo purchased a portion of the island of Elba from the Republic of Genoa and based the Tuscan navy there.
He died in 1574, succeeded by his eldest surviving son Francesco, whose inability to produce male heirs led to the succession of his younger brother, Ferdinando, upon his death in 1587.
Francesco married Johanna of Austria, and with his consort produced Eleonora de' Medici, Duchess of Mantua, and Marie de' Medici, Queen of France and of Navarre.
Through Marie, all succeeding French monarchs (bar the Napoleons) are descended from Francesco.
Ferdinando eagerly assumed the government of Tuscany.
He commanded the draining of the Tuscan marshlands, built a road network in Southern Tuscany and cultivated trade in Leghorn.
To augment the Tuscan silk industry, he oversaw the planting of Mulberry trees along the major roads (silk worms feed on Mulberry leaves).
He shifted Tuscany away from Habsburg hegemony by marrying the first non-Habsburg candidate since Alessandro, Christina of Lorraine, a granddaughter of Catherine de' Medici.
The Spanish reaction was to construct a citadel on their portion of the island of Elba.
To strengthen the new Franco-Tuscan alliance, he married his niece, Marie, to Henry IV of France.
Henry explicitly stated that he would defend Tuscany from Spanish aggression, but later reneged, after which Ferdinando was forced to marry his heir, Cosimo, to Maria Maddalena of Austria to assuage Spain (where Maria Maddalena's sister was the incumbent Queen consort).
Ferdinando sponsored a Tuscan expedition to the New World with the intention of establishing a Tuscan colony.
Despite all of these incentives to economic growth and prosperity, the population of Florence at the dawn of the 17th century was a mere 75,000, far smaller than the other capitals of Italy: Rome, Milan, Venice, Palermo and Naples.
Francesco and Ferdinando, due to lax distinction between Medici and Tuscan state property, are thought to have been wealthier than their ancestor, Cosimo de' Medici, the founder of the dynasty.
The Grand Duke alone had the prerogative to exploit the state's mineral and salt resources, and the fortunes of the Medici were directly tied to the Tuscan economy.
========,3,17th century.
Ferdinando, although no longer a cardinal, exercised much influence at successive conclaves.
In 1605, Ferdinando succeeded in getting his candidate, Alessandro de' Medici, elected Pope Leo XI.
He died the same month, but his successor, Pope Paul V, was also pro-Medici.
Ferdinando's pro-Papal foreign policy, however, had drawbacks.
Tuscany was overrun with religious orders, not all of whom were obliged to pay taxes.
Ferdinando died in 1609, leaving an affluent realm; his inaction in international affairs, however, would have long-reaching consequences down the line.
In France, Marie de' Medici was acting as regent for her son, Louis XIII.
Louis repudiated her pro-Habsburg policy in 1617.
She lived the rest of her life deprived of any political influence.
Ferdinando's successor, Cosimo II, reigned for less than 12 years.
He married Maria Maddalena of Austria, with whom he had his eight children, including Margherita de' Medici, Ferdinando II de' Medici, and an Anna de' Medici.
He is most remembered as the patron of astronomer Galileo Galilei, whose 1610 treatise, Sidereus Nuncius, was dedicated to him.
Cosimo died of consumption (tuberculosis) in 1621.
Cosimo's elder son, Ferdinando, was not yet of legal maturity to succeed him, thus Maria Maddalena and his grandmother, Christina of Lorraine, acted as regents.
Their collective regency is known as the "Turtici".
Maria Maddelana's temperament was analogous to Christina's, and together they aligned Tuscany with the Papacy, re-doubled the Tuscan clergy, and allowed the heresy trial of Galileo Galilei to occur.
Upon the death of the last Duke of Urbino (Francesco Maria II), instead of claiming the duchy for Ferdinando, who was married to the Duke of Urbino's granddaughter and heiress, Vittoria della Rovere, they permitted it to be annexed by Pope Urban VIII.
In 1626, they banned any Tuscan subject from being educated outside the Grand Duchy, a law later overturned but resurrected by Maria Maddalena's grandson, Cosimo III.
Harold Acton, an Anglo-Italian historian, ascribes the decline of Tuscany to the "Turtici" regency.
Grand Duke Ferdinado was obsessed with new technology, and had a variety of hygrometers, barometers, thermometers, and telescopes installed in the Palazzo Pitti.
In 1657, Leopoldo de' Medici, the Grand Duke’s youngest brother, established the Accademia del Cimento, organized to attract scientists to Florence from all over Tuscany for mutual study.
Tuscany participated in the Wars of Castro (the last time Medicean Tuscany proper was involved in a conflict) and inflicted a defeat on the forces of Pope Urban VIII in 1643.
The war effort was costly and the treasury so empty because of it that when the Castro mercenaries were paid for, the state could no longer afford to pay interest on government bonds, with the result that the interest rate was lowered by 0.75%.
At that time, the economy was so decrepit that barter trade became prevalent in rural market places.
Ferdinando died on 23 May 1670 afflicted by apoplexy and dropsy.
He was interred in the Basilica of San Lorenzo, the Medici's necropolis.
At the time of his death, the population of the grand duchy was 730,594; the streets were lined with grass and the buildings on the verge of collapse in Pisa.
Ferdinando's marriage to Vittoria della Rovere produced two children: Cosimo III de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany and Francesco Maria de' Medici, Duke of Rovere and Montefeltro.
Upon Vittoria's death in 1694, her allodial possessions, the Duchies of Rovere and Montefeltro, passed to her younger son.
========,3,18th century: the fall of the dynasty.
Cosimo III married Marguerite Louise d'Orléans, a granddaughter of Henry IV of France and Marie de' Medici.
An exceedingly discontented pairing, this union produced three children, notably Anna Maria Luisa de' Medici, Electress Palatine and the last Medicean Grand Duke of Tuscany, Gian Gastone de' Medici.
Johann Wilhelm, Elector Palatine, Anna Maria Luisa's spouse, successfully requisitioned the dignity "Royal Highness" for the Grand Duke and his family in 1691, despite the fact that they had no claim to any kingdom.
Cosimo frequently paid the Holy Roman Emperor, his nominal feudal overlord, exorbitant dues; and he sent munitions to the Emperor during the Battle of Vienna.
The Medici lacked male heirs, and in 1705, the grand ducal treasury was virtually bankrupt.
The population of Florence declined by 50%; the population of the grand duchy as a whole declined by an estimated 40%.
Cosimo desperately tried to reach a settlement with the European powers, but Tuscany’s legal status was very complicated: the area of the grand duchy formerly comprising the Republic of Siena was technically a Spanish fief, while the territory of the old Republic of Florence was thought to be under imperial suzerainty.
Upon the death of his first son, Cosimo contemplated restoring the Florentine republic, either upon Anna Maria Luisa's death, or on his own, if he predeceased her.
The restoration of the republic would entail resigning Siena to the Holy Roman Empire, but, regardless, it was vehemently endorsed by his government.
Europe largely ignored Cosimo’s plan, only Great Britain and the Dutch Republic gave any credence to it, and the plan ultimately died with Cosimo III in 1723.
On 4 April 1718, Great Britain, France and the Dutch Republic (and later Austria) selected Don Carlos of Spain, the elder child of Elisabeth Farnese and Philip V of Spain, as the Tuscan heir.
By 1722, the Electress was not even acknowledged as heiress, and Cosimo was reduced to spectator at the conferences for Tuscany's future.
On 25 October 1723, six days before his death, Grand Duke Cosimo disseminated a final proclamation commanding that Tuscany stay independent: Anna Maria Luisa would succeed uninhibited to Tuscany after Gian Gastone, and the Grand Duke reserved the right to choose his successor.
However, these portions of his proclamation were completely ignored and he died a few days later.
Gian Gastone despised the Electress for engineering his catastrophic marriage to Anna Maria Franziska of Saxe-Lauenburg; while she abhorred her brother's liberal policies, he repealed all of his father's anti-Semitic statutes.
Gian Gastone revelled in upsetting her.
On 25 October 1731, a Spanish detachment occupied Florence on behalf of Don Carlos, who disembarked in Tuscany in December of the same year.
The "Ruspanti", Gian Gastone's decrepit entourage, loathed the Electress, and she them.
Duchess Violante, Gian Gastone's sister-in-law, tried to withdraw the Grand Duke from the "Ruspanti" sphere of influence by organising banquets.
His conduct at the banquets was less than regal, he often vomited repeatedly into his napkin, belched, and regaled those present with socially inappropriate jokes.
Following a sprained ankle in 1731, he remained confined to his bed for the rest of his life.
The bed, oft smelling of faeces, was occasionally cleaned by Violante.
In 1736, following the War of the Polish Succession, Don Carlos was disbarred from Tuscany, and Francis III of Lorraine was made heir in his stead.
In January 1737, the Spanish troops withdrew from Tuscany, and were replaced by Austrians.
Gian Gastone died on 9 July 1737, surrounded by prelates and his sister.
Anna Maria Luisa was offered a nominal regency by the Prince de Craon until the new Grand Duke could peregrinate to Tuscany, but declined.
Upon her brother's death, she received all the House of Medici's allodial possessions.
Anna Maria Luisa signed the "Patto di Famiglia" on 31 October 1737.
In collaboration with the Holy Roman Emperor and Grand Duke Francis of Lorraine, she willed all the personal property of the Medici to the Tuscan state, provided that nothing was ever removed from Florence.
The "Lorrainers", as the occupying forces were called, were popularly loathed, but the Regent, the Prince de Craon, allowed the Electress to live unperturbed in the Pitti.
She occupied herself with financing, and with overseeing the construction of the Basilica of San Lorenzo, started in 1604 by Ferdinando I de' Medici, Grand Duke of Tuscany, costing the state 1,000 crowns per week.
She donated much of her fortune to charity: £4,000 a month.
On 19 February 1743, the Dowager Electress Palatine Anna Maria Luisa de' Medici died, and the Grand Ducal line of the House of Medici died with her.
The Florentines grieved her, and she was interred in the crypt that she helped to complete, San Lorenzo.
The extinction of the main Medici dynasty and the accession in 1737 of Francis Stephen, Duke of Lorraine and husband of Maria Theresa of Austria, led to Tuscany's temporary inclusion in the territories of the Austrian crown.
The line of the principi di Ottajano, an extant branch of the House of Medici who were eligible to inherit the grand duchy of Tuscany when the last male of the senior branch died in 1737, could have carried on as Medici sovereigns but for the intervention of Europe's major powers, which allocated the sovereignty of Florence elsewhere.
As a consequence, the Duchy expired and the territory became a secundogeniture of the Habsburg-Lorraine dynasty.
The first Grand Duke of the new dynasty, Francis I, was a great-great-great-grandson of Francesco I de' Medici, thus continuing the Medicean Dynasty on the throne of Tuscany through the female line.
The Habsburgs were deposed for the Bourbon-Parma in 1801 (themselves deposed in 1807), and restored at the Congress of Vienna.
Tuscany became a province of the United Kingdom of Italy in 1861.
However, several extant branches of the House of Medici currently continue to exist including the Princes of Ottajano, the Medici Tornaquinci, and the Verona Medici Counts of Caprara and Gavardo.
========,2,Legacy.
The biggest accomplishments of the Medici were in the sponsorship of art and architecture, mainly early and High Renaissance art and architecture.
The Medici were responsible for the majority of Florentine art during their reign.
Their money was significant because during this period, artists generally only made their works when they received commissions in advance.
Giovanni di Bicci de' Medici, the first patron of the arts in the family, aided Masaccio and commissioned Brunelleschi for the reconstruction of the Basilica of San Lorenzo, Florence in 1419.
Cosimo the Elder's notable artistic associates were Donatello and Fra Angelico.
The most significant addition to the list over the years was Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475–1564), who produced work for a number of Medici, beginning with Lorenzo the Magnificent, who was said to be extremely fond of the young Michelangelo, inviting him to study the family collection of antique sculpture.
Lorenzo also served as patron to Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519) for seven years.
Indeed, Lorenzo was an artist in his own right, and author of poetry and song; his support of the arts and letters is seen as a high point in Medici patronage.
After Lorenzo's death the puritanical Dominican friar, Girolamo Savonarola rose to prominence, warning Florentines against excessive luxury.
Under Savonarola's fanatical leadership, many great works were "voluntarily" destroyed in the Bonfire of the Vanities (February 7, 1497).
The following year, on May 23, 1498, Savonarola and two young supporters were burned at the stake in the Piazza della Signoria, the same location as his bonfire.
In addition to commissions for art and architecture, the Medici were prolific collectors and today their acquisitions form the core of the Uffizi museum in Florence.
In architecture, the Medici are responsible for some notable features of Florence; including the Uffizi Gallery, the Boboli Gardens, the Belvedere, the Medici Chapel and the Palazzo Medici.
Later, in Rome, the Medici Popes continued in the family tradition of patronizing artists in Rome.
Pope Leo X would chiefly commission works from Raphael.
Pope Clement VII commissioned Michelangelo to paint the altar wall of the Sistine Chapel just before the pontiff's death in 1534.
Eleanor of Toledo, princess of Spain and wife of Cosimo I the Great, purchased the Pitti Palace from Buonaccorso Pitti in 1550.
Cosimo in turn patronized Vasari who erected the Uffizi Gallery in 1560 and founded the Accademia delle Arti del Disegno – ("Academy of the Arts of Drawing") in 1563.
Marie de' Medici, widow of Henry IV of France and mother of Louis XIII, is the subject of a commissioned cycle of paintings known as the Marie de' Medici cycle, painted for the Luxembourg Palace by court painter Peter Paul Rubens in 1622–23.
Although none of the Medici themselves were scientists, the family is well known to have been the patrons of the famous Galileo Galilei, who tutored multiple generations of Medici children, and was an important figurehead for his patron's quest for power.
Galileo's patronage was eventually abandoned by Ferdinando II, when the Inquisition accused Galileo of heresy.
However, the Medici family did afford the scientist a safe haven for many years.
Galileo named the four largest moons of Jupiter after four Medici children he tutored, although the names Galileo used are not the names currently used.
========,2,Main genealogical table.
The table below shows the origins of the Medici: 
This extract shows the branch that gave rise to the celebrated branch of the Medici descending from Giovanni "di Bicci", who founded the Medici fortunes: 
This shows the main branch of Cosimo, who founded the political supremacy of the Medici in Florence:
This is the branch of Cosimo's brother, Lorenzo, which gave rise to the Grand-Dukes of Florence:
This is the line of the Grand-Dukes of Florence, descending from Cosimo's brother Lorenzo, called the "Popolano" Branch:
