========,1,preface.
Huesca (; ) is a city in north-eastern Spain, within the autonomous community of Aragon.
It is also the capital of the Spanish province of the same name and of the comarca of Hoya de Huesca.
In 2009 it had a population of 52,059, almost a quarter of the total population of the province.
The city is one of the smallest provincial capitals in Spain.
Huesca celebrates its main festival "Fiestas de San Lorenzo" from 9 to 15 August.
========,2,History.
Huesca dates from pre-Roman times, and was once known as Bolskan in the ancient Iberian language.
It was once the capital of the Vescetani, in the north of Hispania Tarraconensis, on the road from Tarraco (modern Tarragona) and Ilerda (modern Lleida) to Caesaraugusta (modern Zaragoza).
During Roman times, the city was known as Osca, and was a Roman colony under the rule of Quintus Sertorius, who made Osca his base.
The city minted its own coinage and was the site of a prestigious school founded by Sertorius to educate young Iberians in Latin and Roman customs.
After Sertorius, it is thought that it was renamed Ileoscan () by Strabo.
It appears to have been situated on silver mines.
Eighteenth-century Spanish historian Enrique Flórez has pointed out the impossibility of one city supplying such vast quantities of minted silver as has been recorded by ancient writers under the terms "argentum Oscense", "signatum Oscense"; and is of the opinion that "Oscense" meant "Spanish", being a corruption of "Eus-cara".
The Romanised city was made a "municipium" by decree of Augustus in 30 BC.
The Arabs conquered the city in the late 8th century, and the city came to be called "Washqah" (وشقة in Arabic), falling within the Upper March of the Emirate of Córdoba.
It was ruled by a local governor appointed from Córdoba, but was repeatedly subject to political turmoil, rebellion and assassination as the Banu Qasi, Banu Amrus and Banu al-Tawil clans, as well as the Arista dynasty of Pamplona, struggled for control, autonomy and independence from the Emirate.
In the mid-10th century, Wasqah was transferred to the Banu Tujibi, who governed the Upper March from Zaragoza, and it became part of the Taifa of Zaragoza in 1018 when they successfully freed themselves from the disintegrating Caliphate.
In 1094 Sancho Ramirez built the nearby Castle of Montearagón with the intention of laying siege to Wasqah but was killed by a stray arrow as he reached the city's walls.
It was conquered in 1096 by Peter I of Aragon.
In 1354, King Peter IV of Aragon founded the , which initially had a faculty of theology.
The school expanded, but by the end of the 16th century was eclipsed by the University of Zaragoza.
The university was abolished in 1845.
During the Spanish Civil War (1936–39) the "Huesca Front" was the scene of some of the worst fighting between the Republicans and Franco's army.
The city was besieged by the Republicans, George Orwell among them, but didn't fall.
========,2,Modern Huesca.
Huesca celebrates its most important annual festival in August: the festival (or fiesta) of San Lorenzo (Saint Lawrence), a native of Huesca martyred in 268 AD.
The anniversary of his martyrdom falls on August 10.
The fiesta starts on 9 August and finishes on the 15.
Many of the inhabitants dress in green and white for the duration.
San Lorenzo, born in Huesca, was a deacon in Rome and a martyr who, according to legend, was burned on a grille by the Romans.
The grille is the symbol of San Lorenzo and can be seen in a number of decorative works in the city.
Huesca is also the birthplace of film director Carlos Saura and his brother Antonio Saura, a contemporary artist.
There is an international film festival held annually.
The writer Oscar Sipan, winner of several literary prizes, was born in Huesca in 1974.
The celebrated illustrator Isidro Ferrer, though born in Madrid, lives in the city.
========,2,Geography.
Huesca lies on a plateau in the northern region of Aragón, at an altitude of 488 m (1,601.05 ft) above sea level.
Close to the city lie the Sierra de Guara mountains, which reach 2,077 m. The geographical coordinates of the city are: 42° 08´ N, 0° 24´ W.
Its municipal area is 161.02 km ² and borders the municipalities of Almudévar, Vicién, Monflorite-Lascasas Tierz, Quicena, Loporzano, Nueno, Igriés, Banastás, Chimillas, Alerre, Barbués and Albero Bajo.
The city lies 71 kilometres (44 mi) from Zaragoza, 160 kilometres (99 mi) from Pamplona, 118 kilometres (73 mi) from Lleida, 380 kilometres (236 mi) from Madrid and 273 kilometres (169 mi) from Barcelona.
========,2,Climate.
Huesca has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen "Cfa").
with semi-arid influences.
Winters are cool (with normal maximums from 8 to 16 °C and minimums from -2 to 6 °C) and summers are hot, with daily maximums reaching up to , while the rainiest seasons are autumn and spring.
The average precipitation is 480 mm per year.
Frost is common and there is sporadic snowfall, with an average of 3 snowy days per year.
========,2,Main sights.
A double line of ancient walls can still be seen in present-day Huesca.
Nearby, in the territory of Quicena, lie the ruins of the Castle of Montearagón Monastery.
========,2,Popular references.
Huesca is notable for the saying "Tomorrow we'll have coffee in Huesca", a running joke among militiamen of the Spanish Civil War.
In February 1937, George Orwell was stationed near the falangist-held Huesca as a member of the POUM militia.
In "Homage to Catalonia", Orwell writes about this running joke, originally a naïvely optimistic comment made by one of the Spanish Republican generals:
Orwell never did, but the Indian writer Shashi Tharoor fulfilled his wish on his behalf in 1980, and has written about the experience.
Huesca is also famous for the legend of the Bell of Huesca.
