========,1,preface.
3 Feet High and Rising is the debut studio album by American hip hop trio De La Soul.
It was released on March 14, 1989, by Tommy Boy Records and Warner Bros. Records.
It marked the first of three full-length collaborations with producer Prince Paul, which would become the critical and commercial peak of both parties.
It is consistently placed on 'greatest albums' lists by noted music critics and publications.
Robert Christgau called the record "unlike any rap album you or anybody else has ever heard."
In 1998, the album was selected as one of "The Source Magazine's 100 Best Rap Albums."
Critically, as well as commercially, the album was a success.
It contains the singles, "Me Myself and I", "The Magic Number", "Buddy", and "Eye Know".
In 2001, the album was re-issued along with an extra disc of B-side tracks, and alternative versions.
The album title came from the Johnny Cash song "Five Feet High and Rising".
It was selected by the Library of Congress as a 2010 addition to the National Recording Registry, which selects recordings annually that are culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant.
========,2,Artwork.
The album's artwork was designed by Toby Mott's and Paul Spencer's radical British art collective the Grey Organisation (GO).
In 1986 Mott and Spencer had moved from London to New York after GO's infamous paint attacks on Cork Street art galleries, where they began working as bicycle messengers.
By 1989, GO were exhibiting their paintings around the East Village and working as art directors for Tommy Boy Records and MTV (among others) making music videos for various groups, such as Public Enemy, A Tribe Called Quest, and The Rolling Stones.
GO also began designing album covers for groups such as Information Society and De La Soul, most notably "3 Feet High and Rising".
Mott describes the process of designing the album cover in his essay 'Hip Hop in The Daisy Age': "We have come up with the 'Daisy Age' visual concept.
De La Soul visit our loft where we lay them down on the floor facing up, their heads making a triangle.
We photograph them whilst hanging precariously off a step ladder, one idea being that the cover would not have a right way up.
CD's have yet to be the dominant musical format so the vinyl album sleeve is our most effective way of making a statement.
We layer the coloured hand drawn flower designs made with Posca paint pens on acetate over the black and white photographic portrait print, which is rostrum camera copied.
This is well before the time of Apple Macs and scanning etc.
[...] The intent of the design of De La Soul's, "3 Feet High and Rising" LP cover is to be new and bright, with the overlaying of the fluorescent flowers and text reflecting a synthetic pop cartoon look [...] This is a move away from the prevailing macho hip hop visual codes which dominate to this day".
========,2,Reception and influence.
It is listed on Rolling Stones' "200 Essential Rock Records" and The Source's "100 Best Rap Albums" (both of which are unordered).
When Village Voice held its annual Pazz & Jop Critics Poll for 1989, "3 Feet High and Rising" was ranked at #1, outdistancing its nearest opponent (Neil Young's "Freedom") by 21 votes and 260 points.
It was also listed on the "Rolling Stone"'s "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time".
Released amid the 1989 boom in gangsta rap, which gravitated towards hardcore, confrontational, violent lyrics, De La Soul's uniquely positive style made them an oddity beginning with the first single, "Me, Myself and I".
Their positivity meant many observers labeled them a "hippie" group, based on their declaration of the "D.A.I.S.Y.
Age" ("da inner sound, y'all").
Sampling artists as diverse as Johnny Cash, Hall & Oates, Steely Dan and The Turtles, "3 Feet High and Rising" is often viewed as the stylistic beginning of 1990s alternative hip hop (and especially jazz rap).
"An inevitable development in the class history of rap, [De La Soul is] new wave to Public Enemy's punk," wrote critic Robert Christgau in his "Village Voice" review of "3 Feet High and Rising": "Their music is maddeningly disjunct, and a few of the 24-cuts-in-67-minutes (too long for vinyl) are self-indulgent, arch.
But their music is also radically unlike any rap you or anybody else has ever heard — inspirations include the Jarmels and a learn-it-yourself French record.
And for all their kiddie consciousness, junk-culture arcana, and suburban in-jokes, they're in the new tradition — you can dance to them, which counts for plenty when disjunction is your problem."
"Rolling Stone" magazine gave the album three stars and concluded that it was "(o)ne of the most original rap records ever to come down the pike, the inventive, playful "3 Feet High and Rising" stands staid rap conventions on their def ear."
It was ranked 7 in "Spin"'s "100 Greatest Albums, 1985–2005", ranked 88th in a 2005 survey held by British television's Channel 4 to determine the 100 greatest albums of all time.
In 1998, the album was selected as one of The Source's 100 Best Rap Albums.
In 2003, the album was ranked number 346 on "Rolling Stone" magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time.
In 2006, "Q" magazine placed the album at #20 in its list of "40 Best Albums of the '80s".
In 2012, Slant Magazine listed the album at #9 on its list of "Best Albums of the 1980s".
***LIST***.
Electronica artist James Lavelle cited "3 Feet High and Rising" as one of his favorite albums.
"It was definitely a reaction to the slightly more hardcore area of what was going on in hip hop.
As a concept record, it's probably one of the best ever.
It's like the Pink Floyd of hip hop, their "Dark Side of the Moon" – the way it musically and sonically moves around, but also the use of language was so unusual and out there."
Macy Gray felt it was "the best record of the past 15 years" in a "Q magazine" review: "They're like The Beatles of hip hop."
In 2011, "3 Feet High and Rising" was among 25 albums chosen as additions to the Library of Congress' 2010 National Recording Registry for being cultural and aesthetical and also for its historical impact.
"America's recorded-sound heritage has in many ways transformed the soundscape of the modern world, resonating and flowing through our cultural memory, audio recordings have documented our lives and allowed us to share artistic expressions and entertainment.
Songs, words, and the natural sounds of the world that we live in have been captured on one of the most perishable of all of our art media.
The salient question is not whether we should preserve these artifacts, but how best collectively to save this indispensable part of our history.
"— James H. Billington from the Library of Congress.
Coincidentally, Steely Dan's album "Aja", from which "3 Feet High and Rising" samples, was also named to the registry that year.
The album is also credited with introducing the hip hop skit, a style of comedic sketch used both to introduce rap albums and as interludes between songs.
