========,1,preface.
Collision detection typically refers to the computational problem of detecting the intersection of two or more objects.
While the topic is most often associated with its use in video games and other physical simulations, it also has applications in robotics.
In addition to determining whether two objects have collided, collision detection systems may also calculate "time of impact" (TOI), and report a "contact manifold" (the set of intersecting points).
Collision response deals with simulating what happens when a collision is detected (see physics engine, ragdoll physics).
Solving collision detection problems requires extensive use of concepts from linear algebra and computational geometry.
========,2,Overview.
In physical simulation, we wish to conduct experiments, such as playing billiards.
The physics of bouncing billiard balls are well understood, under the umbrella of rigid body motion and elastic collisions.
An initial description of the situation would be given, with a very precise physical description of the billiard table and balls, as well as initial positions of all the balls.
Given a force applied to the cue ball (probably resulting from a player hitting the ball with his or her cue stick), we want to calculate the trajectories, precise motion, and eventual resting places of all the balls with a computer program.
A program to simulate this game would consist of several portions, one of which would be responsible for calculating the precise impacts between the billiard balls.
This particular example also turns out to be ill conditioned: a small error in any calculation will cause drastic changes in the final position of the billiard balls.
Video games have similar requirements, with some crucial differences.
While physical simulation needs to simulate real-world physics as precisely as possible, video games need to simulate real-world physics in an "acceptable" way, in real time and robustly.
Compromises are allowed, so long as the resulting simulation is satisfying to the game players.
========,2,Collision detection in physical simulation.
Physical simulators differ in the way they react on a collision.
Some use the softness of the material to calculate a force, which will resolve the collision in the following time steps like it is in reality.
Due to the low softness of some materials this is very CPU intensive.
Some simulators estimate the time of collision by linear interpolation, roll back the simulation, and calculate the collision by the more abstract methods of conservation laws.
Some iterate the linear interpolation (Newton's method) to calculate the time of collision with a much higher precision than the rest of the simulation.
Collision detection utilizes time coherence to allow even finer time steps without much increasing CPU demand, such as in air traffic control.
After an inelastic collision, special states of sliding and resting can occur and, for example, the Open Dynamics Engine uses constraints to simulate them.
Constraints avoid inertia and thus instability.
Implementation of rest by means of a scene graph avoids drift.
In other words, physical simulators usually function one of two ways, where the collision is detected "a posteriori" (after the collision occurs) or "a priori" (before the collision occurs).
In addition to the "a posteriori" and "a priori" distinction, almost all modern collision detection algorithms are broken into a hierarchy of algorithms.
Often the terms "discrete" and "continuous" are used rather than "a posteriori" and "a priori".
========,3,A posteriori (discrete) versus a priori (continuous).
In the "a posteriori" case, we advance the physical simulation by a small time step, then check if any objects are intersecting, or are somehow so close to each other that we deem them to be intersecting.
At each simulation step, a list of all intersecting bodies is created, and the positions and trajectories of these objects are somehow "fixed" to account for the collision.
We say that this method is "a posteriori" because we typically miss the actual instant of collision, and only catch the collision after it has actually happened.
In the "a priori" methods, we write a collision detection algorithm which will be able to predict very precisely the trajectories of the physical bodies.
The instants of collision are calculated with high precision, and the physical bodies never actually interpenetrate.
We call this "a priori" because we calculate the instants of collision before we update the configuration of the physical bodies.
The main benefits of the "a posteriori" methods are as follows.
In this case, the collision detection algorithm need not be aware of the myriad of physical variables; a simple list of physical bodies is fed to the algorithm, and the program returns a list of intersecting bodies.
The collision detection algorithm doesn't need to understand friction, elastic collisions, or worse, nonelastic collisions and deformable bodies.
In addition, the "a posteriori" algorithms are in effect one dimension simpler than the "a priori" algorithms.
Indeed, an "a priori" algorithm must deal with the time variable, which is absent from the "a posteriori" problem.
On the other hand, "a posteriori" algorithms cause problems in the "fixing" step, where intersections (which aren't physically correct) need to be corrected.
Moreover, if the discrete step is too large, the collision could go undetected, resulting in an object which passes through another if it is sufficiently fast or small.
The benefits of the "a priori" algorithms are increased fidelity and stability.
It is difficult (but not completely impossible) to separate the physical simulation from the collision detection algorithm.
However, in all but the simplest cases, the problem of determining ahead of time when two bodies will collide (given some initial data) has no closed form solution—a numerical root finder is usually involved.
Some objects are in "resting contact", that is, in collision, but neither bouncing off, nor interpenetrating, such as a vase resting on a table.
In all cases, resting contact requires special treatment: If two objects collide ("a posteriori") or slide ("a priori") and their relative motion is below a threshold, friction becomes stiction and both objects are arranged in the same branch of the scene graph.
========,2,Optimization.
The obvious approaches to collision detection for multiple objects are very slow.
Checking every object against every other object will, of course, work, but is too inefficient to be used when the number of objects is at all large.
Checking objects with complex geometry against each other in the obvious way, by checking each face against each other face, is itself quite slow.
Thus, considerable research has been applied to speed up the problem.
========,3,Spatial partitioning.
Alternative algorithms are grouped under the spatial partitioning umbrella, which includes octrees, binary space partitioning (or BSP trees) and other, similar approaches.
If one splits space into a number of simple cells, and if two objects can be shown not to be in the same cell, then they need not be checked for intersection.
Since BSP trees can be precomputed, that approach is well suited to handling walls and fixed obstacles in games.
These algorithms are generally older than the algorithms described above.
========,3,Bounding boxes.
Bounding boxes (or Bounding volumes) are most often a 2D rectangle or 3D cuboid, but other shapes are possible.
The bounding diamond, the minimum bounding parallelogram, the convex hull, the bounding circle or bounding ball, and the bounding ellipse have all been tried, but bounding boxes remain the most popular due to their simplicity.
Bounding boxes are typically used in the early (pruning) stage of collision detection, so that only objects with overlapping bounding boxes need be compared in detail.
========,2,Video games.
Video games have to split their very limited computing time between several tasks.
Despite this resource limit, and the use of relatively primitive collision detection algorithms, programmers have been able to create believable, if inexact, systems for use in games .
For a long time, video games had a very limited number of objects to treat, and so checking all pairs was not a problem.
In two-dimensional games, in some cases, the hardware was able to efficiently detect and report overlapping pixels between sprites on the screen.
In other cases, simply tiling the screen and binding each "sprite" into the tiles it overlaps provides sufficient pruning, and for pairwise checks, bounding rectangles or circles called hitboxes are used and deemed sufficiently accurate.
Three-dimensional games have used spatial partitioning methods for ***formula***-body pruning, and for a long time used one or a few spheres per actual 3D object for pairwise checks.
Exact checks are very rare, except in games attempting to simulate reality closely.
Even then, exact checks are not necessarily used in all cases.
Because games do not need to mimic actual physics, stability is not as much of an issue.
Almost all games use "a posteriori" collision detection, and collisions are often resolved using very simple rules.
For instance, if a character becomes embedded in a wall, they might be simply moved back to their last known good location.
Some games will calculate the distance the character can move before getting embedded into a wall, and only allow him to move that far.
In many cases for video games, approximating the characters by a point is sufficient for the purpose of collision detection with the environment.
In this case, Binary space partitioning trees provide a viable, efficient and simple algorithm for checking if a point is embedded in the scenery or not.
Such a data structure can also be used to handle "resting position" situation gracefully when a character is running along the ground.
Collisions between characters, and collisions with projectiles and hazards, are treated separately.
A robust simulator is one that will react to any input in a reasonable way.
For instance, if we imagine a high speed racecar video game, from one simulation step to the next, it is conceivable that the cars would advance a substantial distance along the race track.
If there is a shallow obstacle on the track (such as a brick wall), it is not entirely unlikely that the car will completely leap over it, and this is very undesirable.
In other instances, the "fixing" that posteriori algorithms require isn't implemented correctly, and characters find themselves embedded in walls, or falling off into a deep void, sometimes referred to as "black hell", "blue hell", or "green hell", depending on the predominant color.
These are the hallmarks of a failing collision detection and physical simulation system. ""
is an infamous example of a game with a collision detection system failing, or not being present at all.
