========,1,preface.
Menander (; , "Menandros"; c. 342/41 – c. 290 BC) was a Greek dramatist and the best-known representative of Athenian New Comedy.
He wrote 108 comedies and took the prize at the Lenaia festival eight times.
His record at the City Dionysia is unknown but may well have been similarly spectacular.
One of the most popular writers of antiquity, his work was lost during the Middle Ages and is known in modernity in highly fragmentary form, much of which was discovered in the 20th century.
Only one play, "Dyskolos", has survived almost entirely.
========,2,Life and work.
Menander was the son of well-to-do parents; his father Diopeithes is identified by some with the Athenian general and governor of the Thracian Chersonese known from the speech of Demosthenes "De Chersoneso".
He presumably derived his taste for comic drama from his uncle Alexis.
He was the friend, associate, and perhaps pupil of Theophrastus, and was on intimate terms with the Athenian dictator Demetrius of Phalerum.
He also enjoyed the patronage of Ptolemy Soter, the son of Lagus, who invited him to his court.
But Menander, preferring the independence of his villa in the Piraeus and the company of his mistress Glycera, refused.
According to the note of a scholiast on the "Ibis" of Ovid, he drowned while bathing, and his countrymen honored him with a tomb on the road leading to Athens, where it was seen by Pausanias.
Numerous supposed busts of him survive, including a well-known statue in the Vatican, formerly thought to represent Gaius Marius.
His rival in dramatic art (and supposedly in the affections of Glycera) was Philemon, who appears to have been more popular.
Menander, however, believed himself to be the better dramatist, and, according to Aulus Gellius, used to ask Philemon: "Don't you feel ashamed whenever you gain a victory over me?"
According to Caecilius of Calacte (Porphyry in Eusebius, "Praeparatio evangelica") Menander was accused of plagiarism, as his "The Superstitious Man" was taken from "The Augur" of Antiphanes, but reworkings and variations on a theme of this sort were commonplace and so the charge is a complicated one.
How long complete copies of his plays survived is unclear, although 23 of them, with commentary by Michael Psellus, were said to still have been available in Constantinople in the 11th century.
He is praised by Plutarch ("Comparison of Menander and Aristophanes") and Quintilian ("Institutio Oratoria"), who accepted the tradition that he was the author of the speeches published under the name of the Attic orator Charisius.
An admirer and imitator of Euripides, Menander resembles him in his keen observation of practical life, his analysis of the emotions, and his fondness for moral maxims, many of which became proverbial: "The property of friends is common," "Whom the gods love die young," "Evil communications corrupt good manners" (from the "Thaïs", quoted in 1 Corinthians 15:33).
These maxims (chiefly monostichs) were afterwards collected, and, with additions from other sources, were edited as "Menander's One-Verse Maxims", a kind of moral textbook for the use of schools.
The single surviving speech from his early play "Drunkenness" is an attack on the politician Callimedon, in the manner of Aristophanes, whose bawdy style was adopted in many of his plays.
Menander found many Roman imitators.
"Eunuchus", "Andria", "Heauton Timorumenos" and "Adelphi" of Terence (called by Caesar "dimidiatus Menander") were avowedly taken from Menander, but some of them appear to be adaptations and combinations of more than one play.
Thus in the "Andria" were combined Menander's "The Woman from Andros" and "The Woman from Perinthos", in the "Eunuchus", "The Eunuch" and "The Flatterer", while the "Adelphi" was compiled partly from Menander and partly from Diphilus.
The original of Terence's "Hecyra" (as of the "Phormio") is generally supposed to be, not by Menander, but Apollodorus of Carystus.
The "Bacchides" and "Stichus" of Plautus were probably based upon Menander's "The Double Deceiver" and "Brotherly-Loving Men", but the "Poenulus" does not seem to be from "The Carthaginian", nor the "Mostellaria" from "The Apparition", in spite of the similarity of titles.
Caecilius Statius, Luscius Lanuvinus, Turpilius and Atilius also imitated Menander.
He was further credited with the authorship of some epigrams of doubtful authenticity; the letters addressed to Ptolemy Soter and the discourses in prose on various subjects mentioned by the "Suda" are probably spurious.
========,2,Loss of his work.
Most of Menander's work did not survive the Middle Ages, except as short fragments.
Federico da Montefeltro's library at Urbino reputedly had "tutte le opere", a complete works, but its existence has been questioned and there are no traces after Cesare Borgia's capture of the city and the transfer of the library to the Vatican.
Until the end of the 19th century, all that was known of Menander were fragments quoted by other authors and collected by Augustus Meineke (1855) and Theodor Kock, "Comicorum Atticorum Fragmenta" (1888).
These consist of some 1650 verses or parts of verses, in addition to a considerable number of words quoted from Menander by ancient lexicographers.
========,2,20th-century discoveries.
This situation changed abruptly in 1907, with the discovery of the Cairo Codex, which contained large parts of the "Samia"; the "Perikeiromene"; the "Epitrepontes"; a section of the "Heros"; and another fragment from an unidentified play.
A fragment of 115 lines of the "Sikyonioi" had been found in the papier mache of a mummy case in 1906.
In 1959, the Bodmer papyrus was published containing "Dyskolos", more of the "Samia", and half the "Aspis".
In the late 1960s, more of the "Sikyonioi" was found as filling for two more mummy cases; this proved to be drawn from the same manuscript as the discovery in 1906, which had clearly been thoroughly recycled.
Other papyrus fragments continue to be discovered and published.
In 2003, a palimpsest manuscript, in Syriac writing of the 9th century, was found where the reused parchment comes from a very expensive 4th-century Greek manuscript of works by Menander.
The surviving leaves contain parts of the "Dyskolos" and 200 lines of another, so far unidentified, piece by Menander.
========,2,Famous quotations.
The apostle Paul in 1 Corinthians 15:33 quotes Menander in the text "Bad company corrupts good character" (NIV) who probably derived this from Euripides (Socrates, "Ecclesiastical History", 3.16).
"He who labors diligently need never despair, for all things are accomplished by diligence and labor."
"Ἀνερρίφθω κύβος" ("anerriphtho kybos"), best known in English as "the die is cast" or "the die has been cast", from the mis-translated Latin ""iacta alea est" (itself better-known in the order "Alea iacta est""); a correct translation is "let the die be cast" (meaning "let the game be ventured").
The Greek form was famously quoted by Julius Caesar upon committing his army to civil war by crossing the River Rubicon.
The popular form "the die is cast" is from the Latin "iacta alea est", a mistranslation by Suetonius, 121 AD.
According to Plutarch, the actual phrase used by Julius Caesar at the crossing of the Rubicon was a quote in Greek from Menander's play "Arrhephoros", with the different meaning "Let the die be cast!".
See discussion at "the die is cast" and "Alea iacta est".
"Lewis and Short", citing Casaubon and Ruhnk, suggest that the text of Suetonius should read "Jacta alea esto", which they translate as "Let the die be cast!
", or "Let the game be ventured!".
This matches Plutarch's third-person perfect imperative ("").
========,2,Standard editions.
The standard edition of the least-well-preserved plays of Menander is Kassel-Austin, "Poetarum Comicorum Graecorum vol.
VI.2".
For the better-preserved plays, the standard edition is now Arnott's 3-volume Loeb.
A complete text of these plays for the Oxford Classical Texts series was left unfinished by Colin Austin at the time of his death; the OCT edition of Harry Sandbach, published in 1972 and updated in 1990, remains in print.
