========,1,preface.
Jens Stoltenberg (; born 16 March 1959) is a Norwegian politician.
Stoltenberg is the 13th Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, effective 1 October 2014.
Stoltenberg served as Prime Minister of Norway from 2000 to 2001 and from 2005 to 2013.
In 2011, Stoltenberg received the United Nations (UN) Champion of Global Change Award in New York City, New York, US, chosen for his extraordinary effort toward meeting the Millennium Development Goals and bringing fresh ideas to global problems.
========,2,Personal life.
========,3,Early life.
Stoltenberg was born 16 March 1959 in Oslo, Norway, into the Stoltenberg family, whose name is derived from Stoltenberg in northern Germany.
The family is believed to have emigrated to Norway in the 17th century.
His father, Thorvald Stoltenberg (born 1931), was a prominent Labour party politician who served as ambassador, as defence minister and as foreign minister.
His mother, Karin Stoltenberg (née Heiberg; 1931–2012), was a geneticist who served as state secretary in multiple governments during the 1980's.
Marianne Heiberg, married to former Foreign Minister Johan Jørgen Holst, was his maternal aunt.
Jens lived in Serbia from 1960 to 1963 while his father was Ambassador to Yugoslavia.
========,3,Education.
Stoltenberg attended primary school at Oslo Waldorf School, and upper secondary school at Oslo Cathedral School.
He served his mandatory military service with the Army's Infantry Training Centre at Evjemoen in Aust-Agder.
After leaving the army, Stoltenberg enrolled at the University of Oslo, graduating in 1987 with the cand.oecon.
degree in economics.
The title of his thesis was "Makroøkonomisk planlegging under usikkerhet.
En empirisk analyse" ("Macroeconomic planning under uncertainty.
An empirical analysis").
========,3,Early political activity.
Stoltenberg's first steps into politics came in his early teens, when he was influenced by his sister Camilla, who at the time was a member of the then Marxist–Leninist group Red Youth.
Opposition to the Vietnam War was his triggering motivation.
Following heavy bombing raids against the North Vietnamese port city of Hai Phong at the end of the Vietnam War, he participated in protest rallies targeting the United States Embassy in Oslo.
On at least one occasion embassy windows were broken by stone-throwing protesters.
Several of Stoltenberg's friends were arrested by the police after these events.
========,3,Family life.
Stoltenberg is married to diplomat Ingrid Schulerud and they have two children: a son, Axel Stoltenberg (born 1989) who is studying Chinese at the Shanghai Jiaotong University and daughter Anne Catharina Stoltenberg (born 1992) who is studying singing in Copenhagen.
He has one living sister, Camilla, a medical researcher and administrator who is one year older than him; and one late sister, Nini, four years younger, who died in 2014.
Nini was a recovering heroin addict, and the Norwegian media have covered the family's efforts to cope with this challenge.
He prefers to spend his summer vacations at his family's cottage on the idyllic Hvaler Islands in the Oslofjord.
An avid outdoorsman, during the winter season he is an active cross-country skier.
In December 2011, in order to mark 100 years since Roald Amundsen reached the south pole on skis, Stoltenberg journeyed to Antarctica.
========,3,Religion.
Although being portrayed as a staunch atheist for most of his adult life, and declining membership in the formerly official Church of Norway, Stoltenberg has stated that he does not consider himself an atheist.
He explained: "Although I am not a member of any denomination, I do believe that there is something greater than man.
Some call it God, others call it something else.
For me, it's about understanding that we humans are small in relation to nature, in relation to the powers that are bigger and stronger than man can ever comprehend.
I find that in a church."
========,2,Career.
========,3,Early career (1979 to 1990).
From 1979 to 1981, Stoltenberg was a journalist for "Arbeiderbladet".
From 1985 to 1989, he was the leader of the Workers' Youth League.
From 1989 to 1990, he worked as an Executive Officer for Statistics Norway, Norway's central institution for producing official statistics.
He also worked part-time as an hourly paid instructor at the University of Oslo during this period.
Between 1990 and 1992, he was leader of the Oslo chapter of the Labour Party.
Up to 1990, he had regular contacts with a Soviet diplomat.
He ended this relationship after being informed by the Norwegian Police Security Service his contact was a KGB agent, warning him of further contact.
Stoltenberg's code name within the KGB was "Steklov".
========,3,Political career in Norway.
========,4,Ministry for Environment and Minister for Trade and Energy (1990 to 1996).
Stoltenberg served as State Secretary in the Ministry of the Environment from 1990 to 1991.
He was first elected to Parliament in 1993 for the Oslo constituency, and is a member of the Labour Party.
He served as Minister of Industry from 1993 to 1996, until Brundtland resigned.
========,4,Minister of Finance (1996 to 2000).
In 1996, Thorbjørn Jagland became Prime Minister, and Stoltenberg became Minister of Finance.
On 29 September 1997, Jagland resigned because of an ultimatum he had issued stating that the cabinet would resign should the party receive less than 36.9% of the popular vote.
Labour only received 35.0%; true to his promise, Jagland resigned as a consequence of its 36.9 ultimatum, and power was transferred to the first cabinet of Kjell Magne Bondevik.
After Jagland's resignation and while in parliamentary opposition, Stoltenberg served on the standing committee on Oil and Energy Affairs in the Storting.
He became the Parliamentary Leader and Prime Minister candidate for the Labour Party in February 2000.
========,4,First term as Prime Minister (2000 to 2001).
In 2000, the first cabinet of Bondevik resigned following an unsuccessful motion of confidence.
Stoltenberg's first cabinet governed Norway from 17 March 2000 to 19 October 2001.
Stoltenberg was the deputy leader of the labor party while Jagland was the party leader.
Instead Jagland was given the post as Foreign Minister.
Stoltenberg's first tenure as Prime Minister (2000–2001) was controversial within his own party, being responsible for reforms and modernisation of the welfare state that included part-privatising several key state-owned services and corporations.
In the parliamentary election of 10 September 2001, the party suffered one of its worst results ever, winning only 24% of the vote.
The 2001, election met with instability for the Labour Party.
The Norwegian newspaper "Dagbladet" stated: "We are heading for a political earthquake when the votes are counted tonight, if we believe the opinion polls."
In an interview with The Associated Press Jagland stated "It is unstable and unpredictable."
After the election in 2001, Stoltenberg and his cabinet were forced to resign, with the Labour Party suffering from its worst election campaign results since 1924.
With the 98% votes taken, the Labour Party only garnered 24%, falling from 35%.
Jagland, the Labor Party leader, commented on the results saying, "We will have to make a decision about whether to continue in government after we know the full results".
After the election Stoltenberg said, "What is clear is that this was a very bad election."
Several analysts has pointed out that one of the reasonable causes for their loss was that with only one year in power until the next election, more time was spent initiating or trying to start reforms than telling the people why they had to be done.
Such reforms included selling down in state-owned companies, re-organisation of health care and public hospitals and changes in sick pay.
The changes made from the 2001 election to the 2005 election was by Norwegian newspaper VG described as an "extreme makeover".
Party leader election The bad election result in 2001 was quickly followed by a leadership battle between Jagland and Stoltenberg.
Both Jagland, as leader, and Stoltenberg, as deputy leader, said they were open to be challenged for their positions at the party's congress in November 2002.
Stoltenberg refused to say whether he would challenge Jagland for the leadership position, which was seen by political commentators as a sign that he probably would seek the leadership position.
In the beginning of February 2002, Jagland, who had been briefly hospitalized in January, and had a subsequent sick leave, said that he would not seek reelection as leader.
In November 2002, Stoltenberg was unanimously elected new leader at the party's congress.
========,4,Second term as Prime Minister (2005 to 2013).
Stoltenberg's second cabinet governed Norway from 17 October 2005 to 16 October 2013.
The 2005 parliamentary election saw a vast improvement for Labour, and the party gained a majority in parliament together with the other "Red-Green" parties, the Socialist Left Party and the Centre Party.
This paved the way for a historic first in Norway, with Labour joining in a coalition government, the Red-Green Coalition, after a coalition deal with Stoltenberg was struck.
Since the government's formation, key political issues such as Norwegian military participation in the current war in Afghanistan, petroleum activities in the Barents Sea, LGBT rights, immigration and the quality of standard education have been greatly debated by the public.
Following Stoltenberg's re-election in 2009, dealt with the ongoing global recession and championed for environmentalist policies through private and corporate taxation.
A marine border dispute with Russia in the Barents Sea since 1978 was settled when Stoltenberg and President of Russia Dimitry Medvedev signed an agreement on 27 April 2010 in Oslo.
The agreement is a compromise, which divides a disputed area of around 175,000 km2 (68,000 sq mi) into two approximately equally sized parts.
However, the agreement still needs ratification by the State Duma and the Parliament of Norway in order to be implemented.
Whereas Norway had previously insisted on a border in accordance with the equidistance principle, which is recognized in international law, specifically the United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea Article 15 and the Convention on the Territorial Sea and the Contiguous Zone Article 6, Russia invoked a Stalin-era decree of the Soviet Union from 1926, which was not recognised by any other country.
The new agreement replaced a controversial temporary agreement negotiated by Jens Evensen and Arne Treholt, who was later revealed to be a Soviet spy and who aided the Soviet Union in the negotiations.
Most of the disputed area was within what would normally be considered Norwegian according to the relevant international treaties.
As Prime Minister, Stoltenberg worked for a constructive relationship with Russia through dialogue and cooperation underpinned by NATO's deterrence and defence capabilities.
During his tenure, he also emphasised the need to focus on security challenges close to Allied territory.
22 July 2011 terror attacks On 22 July 2011, a bomb went off in Oslo outside the government building which houses the prime minister's office, killing at least eight people while wounding others.
About an hour later, a shooting spree, which killed 69 people, was reported at Utøya, an island forty-five minutes away where the ruling Labour Party was holding its annual youth camp.
The PM was due for a visit at the youth camp the next day, and was in his residence preparing his speech at the time of the Oslo explosion.
On Sunday 24 July, Stoltenberg spoke at the church service in the Oslo Cathedral.
He named two of the victims at Utøya, Monica Bøsei, who was the camp's leader, and Tore Eikeland, who was the leader of the youth chapter in Hordaland.
He again vowed to work for more democracy, openness, and humanity, but without naivety.
He also said that "No one has said it better than the AUF girl who was interviewed by CNN: "If one man can show so much hate, think how much love we could show, standing together.""
The AUF girl mentioned is Stine Renate Håheim interviewed by CNN's Richard Quest on 23 July 2011.
Håheim again quoted her friend Helle Gannestad, who had tweeted this from home, watching events unfold on TV.
On 24 August 2012, 33-year-old Norwegian Anders Behring Breivik was found guilty by the Oslo District Court of having perpetrated by himself both terrorist attacks, the bombing of the prime minister's office and the shooting spree on Utøya island, and was convicted to "containment", a special form of prison sentence that can be extended indefinitely—with a time frame of 21 years and a minimum time of 10 years, which, in all, is the maximum penalty in Norway.
On 3 September 2012, Norwegian daily "Klassekampen" wrote that the Gjørv Report on the terrorist attack "is the hardest verdict against a Norwegian cabinet since the Fact-Finding Commission of 1945 ensured that Johan Nygaardsvold's political career was abruptly halted."
Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg said after the Gjørv Report was published that he had "ultimate responsibility for the preparedness in our country, a responsibility I take seriously."
But he said he would not resign.
2013 election and defeat Stoltenberg was the Prime Minister candidate for the Red-Green Coalition in the 2013 elections, seeking re-election for a third term.
On 9 September 2013, the coalition failed to win majority, with 72 of the required 85 mandates, despite the Labour Party remaining the largest party in Norway with 30.8%.
In his speech the same night, he announced that his cabinet would resign in October 2013.
Stoltenberg returned to the Parliament where he became parliamentarian leader for the Labour Party and a member of the Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence.
In December 2013, he was appointed by the United Nations as a Special Envoy on Climate Change, alongside the former Ghanaian president John Kufuor.
========,4,Policies as Prime Minister.
Stoltenberg has been described as a cautious politician, belonging to the right wing of social democracy.
In security policy, Stoltenberg favours increased military spending and dialogue.
Defense and foreign politics While Stoltenberg was Prime Minister, Norway's defence spending increased steadily, with the result that Norway today is one of the NATO allies with the highest per capita defence expenditure.
Stoltenberg has also been instrumental in modernising the Norwegian armed forces, and in contributing forces to various NATO operations.
Stoltenberg is a supporter of enhanced trans-Atlantic cooperation ties.
He has also always been a supporter of Norwegian membership in the European Union.
Stoltenberg has criticized Israel over alleged violations of international law in the Palestinian Territories as well as in international waters, such as the Gaza flotilla raid.
In 2006, Stoltenberg stated that "Norway condemns Israel's actions against Palestinians.
Such collective punishment is totally unacceptable."
Stoltenberg praised doctors Mads Gilbert and Erik Fosse for their humanitarian work in the Gaza Strip during the Gaza War, stating that "all of Norway" was behind them.
Financial crisis Stoltenberg took an international role during the financial crisis by promoting international financial cooperation.
This was among other arenas done through the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and a meeting in Chile 27–29 March 2009 where social democratic leaders from around the world met at a Progressive Governance Conference, just prior to the first G20 summit on the financial crisis.
President Bill Clinton was among the delegates and panel that would chart a way out of the financial crisis, which included the host Michelle Bachelet, Britain's finance minister Gordon Brown, Brazil's President Lula da Silva and Stoltenberg.
A special emergency meeting of the European Social Democratic Forum (PES) was gathered in Oslo in May 2011, on an initiative from Stoltenberg and the think tank Policy Network.
Both nationally and internationally, Stoltenberg emphasised the enormous costs the financial crisis had in the form of a high unemployment rate, and appealed for better international coordination, the balance between austerity and economic growth stimulus, active labor market measures for young people, and investments for increased innovation.
Norway came out of the financial crisis with the lowest unemployment rate in Europe.
Environment and climate change Partnering with tropical countries to preserve more of their rainforest to bind carbon dioxide (CO) in order to reduce greenhouse gas emissions was a policy of the Stoltenberg government.
In 2007, the government received support from the opposition to a long-term agreement to finance forest conservation with 3 billion NOK annually.
Stoltenberg through his governing advocated that international agreements with global taxes or quotas are the most effective means of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
At the UN Climate Change Conference 2009, a separate proposal on the preservation of rainforests with funding from rich countries, advanced by Stoltenberg and Brazilian Pres.
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva in 2009 obtained support from among others U.S. President Barack Obama during COP15 in Copenhagen.
The summit in Copenhagen ended without a binding agreement, but before the subsequent COP16 in Cancún, Stoltenberg succeeded then-British Prime Minister Gordon Brown in the leadership of the committee dealing with the financing of climate actions in developing countries, also consisting of Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi.
Under a separate forest and climate conference in Oslo in May 2010, a proposal was presented to a number of countries, with final delivery of the report in autumn 2010.
A Norwegian proposal for global financing of rainforest deforestation with a strong focus on Brazil, Indonesia and central Africa was also presented.
In January 2014 Jens Stoltenberg became United Nations Special Envoy on Climate Change.
During the meeting there he met with Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon as well as UN Framework Convention director Christiana Figueres and both Achim Steiner and Helen Clark of the United Nations Development Programme.
Vaccines Stoltenberg has been an advocate for having all the world's children vaccinated against infectious diseases.
The first speech he gave in his second term as Prime Minister was during Norway's "Pharmaceutics days" in 2005 under the title "Vaccination against poverty".
Stoltenberg was director of the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunization (GAVI) from 2002 to 2005 and was awarded the Children's Health Award in 2005.
An international initiative, with the UK, the Gates Foundation and Norway in the lead, that GAVI received more than $3.7 billion until 2015 for their work against child mortality.
Stoltenberg was one of the key driving forces behind the initiative, and has stressed that this is an important contribution to save 9 million children from dying of the most common childhood illnesses.
In his New Year speech on 1 January 2013, Stoltenberg spoke about vaccination of the world's children as a personal matter of the heart.
"Small jabs are giving millions of children the gift of life.
Simple medicines can save their mothers.
The fact that all these mothers' and children's lives can be saved is – as I see it – a miracle of our time," Stoltenberg said in his speech.
========,3,United Nations (2013 to 2014).
In 2011, Stoltenberg received the United Nations (UN) Champion of Global Change Award in New York City, USA, chosen for his extraordinary effort toward meeting the Millennium Development Goals and bringing fresh ideas to global problems.
In 2013, Stoltenberg served as a UN special envoy on climate change (global warming), and he has chaired the UN High-Level Panel on System Wide Coherence and the High-Level Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing.
========,3,NATO Secretary General (2014 to Present).
On 28 March 2014 NATO's North Atlantic Council appointed Stoltenberg as designated successor of Anders Fogh Rasmussen as the 13th Secretary General of NATO and Chairman of the council, effective from 1 October 2014.
The appointment had been widely expected in the media for some time, and commentators pointed out that the alliance's policies toward Russia will be the most important issue faced by Stoltenberg.
Angela Merkel, the Chancellor of Germany, took the initiative to appoint Stoltenberg as Secretary-General, securing the support first of the United States, then of the United Kingdom, and then of all other member states.
Norway was a founding member of NATO in 1949, and Stoltenberg is the first Norwegian to serve as Secretary-General, although former Conservative Party Prime Minister Kåre Willoch was considered a strong candidate in 1988.
In September 2015, Czech Deputy Prime Minister Andrej Babiš criticized NATO's lack of response to the European migrant crisis.
After talks with Stoltenberg on migrant crisis issue Babiš said: "NATO is not interested in refugees, though Turkey, a NATO member, is their entrance gate to Europe and smugglers operate on Turkish territory".
========,2,In popular culture.
========,3,Incognito Taxi Driver in Norway.
In August 2013, Stoltenberg said on his Facebook page that he had spent an afternoon working "incognito" as a taxi driver in Oslo.
Stoltenberg said he had wanted to "hear from real Norwegian voters" and that "taxis were one of the few places where people shared their true views."
He added that, before driving the taxi, he had not driven a car in eight years.
The event was videotaped in a hidden camera fashion, and released as a promotional video by the Labour party for the election campaign.
It was later confirmed that 5 of the 14 customers were paid and recruited by the production company that produced the event for the Labour party.
None, however, knew they would meet Stoltenberg.
