========,1,preface.
The arcade version of "Gradius" was released internationally outside Japan under the title of Nemesis, although later releases kept the original title.
Home versions were released for various platforms, such as the Famicom/NES, the MSX home computer, and the PC Engine, among other formats.
The original arcade game and some of the home versions has also been included in various compilation releases and are available for download in services such as the Virtual Console and PlayStation Network.
========,2,Gameplay.
The player controls the trans-dimensional spaceship Vic Viper, and must battle waves of enemies through various environments.
The game became synonymous with the phrase, "Destroy the core!
", as the standard of boss battles in the "Gradius" series involved combat with a giant craft, in the center of which would be situated one to several blue colored spheres.
These bosses would be designed in such a way that there would be a straight passage from the exterior of the giant craft which leads directly to one of these cores.
The player must fire shots into this passage while avoiding attack patterns from weapon emplacements on the body of the boss.
However, small but destructible walls are situated in this passage, impeding the bullet shots from damaging the core, and must be whittled away by repeated well-placed shots.
In a way, these tiny walls represent the boss' shielding gauge until its core is finally vulnerable to attack.
Some bosses have the ability to regenerate these walls.
When the core has sustained enough hits, it usually changes color from blue to red, indicating that it is in critical condition and its destruction is imminent.
Upon the destruction of a core, a piece of the boss may be put out of commission, seeing that it is no longer powered by a core, or if all of the cores are destroyed, the entire boss is defeated and explodes satisfyingly.
Note that these cores are not present on the more organic bosses of "Gradius".
Such bosses have weak spots in places such as a mouth, head or eye.
When gameplay begins, the Vic Viper is relatively slow and has only a weak gun.
This level of capability is generally insufficient for engaging enemies, but the Vic Viper can gain greater capabilities by collecting and using power-up items.
While most arcade games utilize distinct power up-items that each correspond to a specific effect on the player character, "Gradius" has a single power-up item.
The effect of this power-up item is to advance the currently selected item in a power-up menu that appears at the bottom of the screen.
When the desired power-up is highlighted, the player can obtain it by pressing the power-up button, returning the menu to its initial state in which no power-up is highlighted.
========,3,Release.
Ports of "Gradius" were also done for the Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, Microsoft Windows, MSX, NEC PC-8801, Famicom/NES, PC Engine, Virtual Console, Sharp X1, Sharp X68000, Mobile phones, Sega Saturn, PlayStation and Sinclair ZX Spectrum.
The game went to number 2 in the UK sales charts, behind "Feud".
It was also released on Windows Store on December 20, 2013, GameNow in May 2014 and for PlayStation 4's Arcade Archives on January 25 in Japan.
The NES version of "Gradius" introduced a cheat code that would later become known as the Konami Code, as it would be used in numerous future Konami games.
In this game, inputting the code while pausing the game would grant the player's ship multiple power-ups instantly.
"Gradius" was also converted for the Nintendo Vs. Series arcade platform.
It is identical to the NES version, but includes no cheat codes and allows the player to continue indefinitely.
The arcade version of "Gradius" is included in the "Gradius Collection" for the PlayStation Portable and in "" for the Nintendo DS.
A version for the Game Boy was also released in 1990 under the European name "Nemesis".
It is the first portable game in the Gradius series and contains five levels which play similarly to previous Gradius games.
Players select the stage and the number of available extra lives at the start.
The game was later included in the compilation "Konami GB Collection Vol.
1", where it is titled "Gradius".
========,2,Reception.
The Western cover art for the NES version claimed that it had sold one million copies in Japan.
GameSpot stated that "Gradius" was one of the toughest side-scrolling shooter games available on the NES, second only to "Contra".
IGN has given the game a rating 7 out of 10 for its re-release on the Wii Virtual Console and has hailed it as one of the greatest classic side-scrolling shooter games.
========,3,Legacy.
"Gradius" spawned several sequels, the first of which was 1986's "Salamander".
The series has continued into the seventh generation with "Gradius ReBirth".
