========,1,preface.
Clangers is a British stop-motion animated children's television series of short stories about a family of murine creatures who live on, and inside, a small moon like planet.
They speak only in whistles, and eat green soup supplied by the Soup Dragon and blue string pudding.
The programmes were originally broadcast on BBC1 between 1969 and 1972, followed by the first of three special episodes that was broadcast in 1974.
The series was made by Smallfilms, the company set up by Oliver Postgate (writer, animator and narrator) and Peter Firmin (modelmaker and illustrator).
Firmin designed the characters, and his wife knitted and "dressed" the Clangers.
The music, often part of the story, was by Vernon Elliott.
A new series, narrated by Monty Python actor Michael Palin, started on 15 June 2015 on the UK CBeebies TV channel with successful viewing figures.
Two short specials were broadcast before then.
The new cartoons are still animated in stop-motion animation instead of computer-generated imagery, which replaced the original stop-motion animation in other children's programmes such as Fireman Sam, Thomas & Friends, and The Wombles 
Clangers won a BAFTA in the Best Pre-School Animation category in 2015.
========,2,Background.
The Clangers originated in a series of children's books which developed from another Smallfilms production, "Noggin the Nog".
Publishers Kay and Ward created a series of books from "Noggin the Nog" episodes, which were then extended into a series called "Noggin First Reader", aimed at aiding initial reading skills.
In the 1967 story "Noggin and the Moonmouse," a new horse-trough was put up in the middle of the town in the North-Lands.
A spacecraft hurtled down and splashed into it.
The top unscrewed, and out came a largish, mouse-like character in a duffel coat, who wanted fuel for his spacecraft.
He showed Nooka and the children that what he needed was vinegar and soap-flakes.
So, they filled up the tanks in this little spherical ship, which then "took off in a dreadful cloud smelling of vinegar and soap-flakes, covering the town with bubbles".
In 1969, the BBC asked Smallfilms to produce a new series for colour television, but did not specify a storyline.
Postgate concluded that because space exploration was particularly topical, the new series should be set in space.
He adapted the Moonmouse from the earlier story, removing its tail "because it kept getting into the soup".
The Clangers looked similar to mice, anteaters and, from their pink colour, pigs.
They wore clothes reminiscent of Roman armour, "against the space debris that kept falling onto the planet, lost from other places, such as television sets and bits of an Iron Chicken", and they spoke in whistles.
========,2,Storyline.
The Clangers was described by Postgate as a family set in space.
They were small creatures living in peace and harmony on – and inside – a small, hollow planet, far, far away, nourished by Blue String Pudding, and Green Soup harvested from the planet's volcanic soup wells by the Soup Dragon.
The word "Clanger" is said to derive from the sound made by opening the metal cover of one of the creatures' crater-like burrows, each of which was covered with a door made from an old metal dustbin lid, to protect against meteorite impacts.
In each episode, there would be some problem to solve, something invented or discovered, or perhaps some new visitor to meet.
Music Trees, with note-shaped fruit, grew on the planet's surface, and music would often be an integral feature in the simple but amusing plots.
In the "Fishing" episode, one of the Cheese Trees provided a cylindrical five-line staff for notes taken from the Music Trees.
Postgate provided the narration, for the most part in a soft, melodic voice, describing and accounting for the curious antics of the little blue planet's knitted pink inhabitants, and providing a "translation", as it were, for much of their whistled dialogue.
========,2,Production.
The first episode was broadcast on BBC1 on 16 November 1969, and a further 26 episodes were made.
The last of these was broadcast on 10 November 1972.
The final programme, however, was a four-minute election special, broadcast on 10 October 1974.
This was not shown at the usual slot during children's programmes.
Oliver Postgate said in a 2005 interview that he wasn't sure whether this episode still existed and it has been referred to as a "missing episode".
In fact the whole episode is available from the British Film Institute.
The original Mother Clanger puppet was stolen in 1972.
Major Clanger and the second Mother Clanger are on display at the Rupert Bear Museum.
The Clangers grew in size from the first to the last episode, to allow Firmin to use an Action Man model figure in "The Rock Collector."
In October 2013, the BBC's CBeebies announced that a new series would be produced for their 2015 transmission schedules, with Michael Palin narrating.
US pre-school channel Sprout added the series to their 2015 schedule, with William Shatner narrating.
In November 2015, The Clangers won Best Pre-school Animation at the BAFTAs.
========,2,Music and sound effects.
One of the most noted aspects was the use of sound effects, with a score composed by Vernon Elliott under instructions from Postgate.
Although the episodes were scripted, most of the music used in the two series was written in translation by Postgate in the form of "musical sketches" or graphs that he drew for Elliott, who converted the drawings into a musical score.
The music was then recorded by the two, along with other musicians – dubbed the "Clangers Ensemble" – in a village hall, where they would often leave the windows open, leading to the sounds of birds outside being heard on some recordings.
Much of the score was performed on Elliott's bassoon, and also included harp, clarinet, glockenspiel and bells.
The distinctive whistles made by the Clangers, performed on swanee whistles, have become as identifiable as the characters themselves, much imitated by viewers.
The series creators have said that the Clangers, living in vacuum, did not communicate by sound, but rather by a type of nuclear magnetic resonance, which was translated to audible whistles for the human audience.
These whistles followed the rhythm and intonation of a script in English.
The action was also narrated by a voice-over from Postgate.
However, when the series was shown without narration to a group of overseas students, many of them felt that the Clangers were speaking their particular language.
The song "No Smokes" by psychedelic rock band One in a Million was used in the episode "The Visitor".
John Du Prez, who wrote some of the music for Monty Python (another show Michael Palin was in) composed the score for the 2015 series.
========,2,Episode listing.
========,3,Series 1 (1969–1970).
The first series used to be on at 5:55pm on BBC1.
Although the episode 'Chicken' was at 5:50pm because there was a 'Children in Need of Help' on at 6:00pm.
========,3,Series 2 (1971–1972).
Episodes 1 and 2 were on at 4:50pm, episodes 3, 5 and 6 were on at 5:05pm, episodes 4 and 8 were on at 5:00pm, episode 7 was on at 4:40pm, episode 9 was on at 5:30pm, episodes 10, 11, 12 and 13 were on at 4:00pm on BBC1.
There was also an election special produced in 1974, entitled "Vote for Froglet".
Inspired by what Postgate refers to as the "Winter of Discontent" (a phrase usually used by others to refer to the winter of 1978–79, but in his case to the miners' strike of 1974), and by his recollection of post-war Germany, it was broadcast on the night of the second election in 1974.
The narrator explains the democratic process and demonstrates it by asking the Clangers to vote between the Soup Dragon and a Froglet.
The Soup Dragon wins the election on a policy of "No Soup for Froglets", but the Clangers are dissatisfied with the result.
========,3,Series 3 (revival) (2015–16).
Episodes 1 – 26 were first broadcast at 5:30pm, Episodes 27 – 52 at 6.00pm on CBeebies.
Following the special a full series was commissioned for the summer of 2015.
The series is narrated by Michael Palin and co-produced by Smallfilms with the involvement of Oliver Postgate's son Dan and Peter Firmin.
The series is directed by Chris Tichborne and Mole Hill, with music composed by John Du Prez.
52 11-minute episodes were commissioned.
The voices of the Iron Chicken, the Soup Dragon and the Baby Soup Dragon are by Dan Postgate.
The first episode of the new series aired on 15 June 2015.
It turned out to be a massive hit for CBeebies.
The BBC News Entertainment and Arts magazine revealed that 65% of the episode's viewing audience of 484,000 were adults, and that it was CBeebies' most watched programme of 2015 to date.
The rating was more than double the previous record set by an episode of Alphablocks, Numberjacks, Waybuloo, Fimbles, Charlie and Lola, Teletubbies, The Lingo Show and The Octonauts that year, as well as other CBeebies favourites since their launch in 2002, although an episode of Numberjacks peaked at over 1 million back in 2009.
According to the 7 June 2015 issue of Parade magazine, actor William Shatner has been chosen to be the American narrator for the series when it begins airing on the cable network Sprout.
========,2,Reception.
Although not quite as popular as "Bagpuss" (which in 1999 was voted in a British television poll the best children's television programme ever made), since the death of Postgate in December 2008 interest has been revived in his work, which is considered to have had a notable influence on British culture throughout the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s.
In 2007, Postgate and Firmin were jointly presented with the Action for Children's Arts J. M. Barrie Award "for a lifetime's achievement in delighting children".
========,2,Legacy.
"The Soup Dragons", a Scottish alternative rock band of the late 1980s and early 1990s, took their name from the Clangers character.
In the "Doctor Who" story "The Sea Devils", The Master watches the episode "The Intruder".
He mistakes it for a documentary on alien life, and expresses irritation when George Trenchard does not catch on that he is joking.
A Clanger (as a hand puppet rather than a stop-motion puppet) appears as a member of the "Puppet Government" in The Goodies episode "The Goodies Rule – O.K.?".
From the block's start until its discontinuation, the UK's Nick Jr.
Classics block aired "Clangers" episodes specifically for parents who remembered the show.
Tiny Clanger (also as a hand puppet) appeared on Sprout's programming block, The Sunny Side Up Show in honor of the US premiere of Clangers.
========,2,Other countries.
The series was not widely broadcast outside the UK in the 1970s, mainly because it did not require additional money from sales abroad to finance its production.
However the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation showed the series in 1970 and 1982, entitled "Romlingane".
It was narrated by Ingebrigt Davik, a popular author of children's books.
It was shown on Swedish Television in the late 1960s and 1970s, entitled "Rymdlarna".
The first 13 episodes were also shown on Czechoslovak Television in August 1972, entitled "Rámusíci" as a part of the children's evening program slot "Večerníček".
The revived version in 2015 has received funding from Sprout, a subsidiary of NBCUniversal, and has been pre-sold to other foreign broadcasters including the Australian Broadcasting Corporation.
The American transmissions are narrated by William Shatner.
========,2,VHS and DVD releases.
In the early 1990s, three VHS cassettes of the Clangers were released by BBC Enterprises Ltd. Later, another six cassettes were released by Universal Pictures.
A number of DVDs have also been released by Universal Pictures (original series) and Signature Entertainment (revived series).
