========,1,preface.
Dogma is an official system of principles or tenets of a church, such as Roman Catholicism, or a philosophy such as Stoicism.
"Dogma" is transliterated in the 17th century from Latin (Latin dogma) meaning "philosophical tenet", derived from the Greek 'dogma' (Greek ) meaning literally "that which one thinks is true" and 'dokein' (Greek "dokeo") "to seem good."
"Dogma" refers to positions such as those of a philosopher or of a philosophical school, or in a pejorative sense referring to enforced decisions, such as those of aggressive political interests or authorities.
More generally it is applied to some strong belief that the ones adhering to it are not willing to rationally discuss.
This attitude is named as a dogmatic one, or as dogmatism, and is often used to refer to matters related to religion, but is not limited to theistic attitudes alone.
In Pyrrhonist philosophy "dogma" refers to assent to a proposition about a non-evident matter.
========,2,Religions.
Formally, the term dogma has been used by some theistic religious groups to describe the body of positions forming the group's most central, foundational, or essential beliefs, though the term may also be used to refer to the entire set of formal beliefs identified by a theistic or non-theistic religious group.
In some cases dogma is distinguished from religious opinion and those things in doctrine considered less significant or uncertain.
Formal church dogma is often clarified and elaborated upon in its communication.
========,3,Christianity.
Christianity is defined by a set of core beliefs shared by virtually all Christians, though how those core beliefs are implemented and secondary questions vary within Christianity.
When formally communicated by the organization, these beliefs are sometimes referred to as 'dogmata.'
The organization's formal religious positions may be taught to new members or simply communicated to those who choose to become members, It is rare for agreement with an organizations formal positions to be a requirement for attendance, though membership may be required for some church activities.
Protestants to differing degrees are less formal about doctrine, and often rely on denomination-specific beliefs, but seldom refer to these beliefs as dogmata.
========,4,Catholicism.
For Catholicism and Eastern Christianity, the dogmata are contained in the Nicene Creed and the canon laws of two, three, seven, or twenty ecumenical councils (depending on whether one is "Nestorian", Oriental Orthodox, Eastern Orthodox, or Roman Catholic).
These tenets are summarized by St. John of Damascus in his "Exact Exposition of the Orthodox Faith", which is the third book of his main work, titled "The Fount of Knowledge".
In this book he takes a dual approach in explaining each article of the faith: one, directed at Christians, where he uses quotes from the Bible and, occasionally, from works of other Fathers of the Church, and the second, directed both at members of non-Christian religions and at atheists, for whom he employs Aristotelian logic and dialectics.
The decisions of fourteen later councils that Catholics hold as dogmatic and a small number of decrees promulgated by popes exercising papal infallibility (for examples, see Immaculate Conception and Assumption of Mary) are considered as being a part of the Church's sacred body of doctrine.
