========,1,preface.
The first HMS "Wivern" was an ironclad turret ship built at Birkenhead, England, one of two sister ships secretly ordered from the John Laird Sons & Company shipyard by the Confederate States of America in 1862.
Her true ownership was concealed by the fiction that she was being constructed as the Egyptian warship "El Monassir".
She was to have been named "Mississippi" upon delivery to the Confederates.
========,2,Design and description.
"Wivern" and her sister were intended, together with other warships, to break the Federal blockade of Confederate coastal cities and to hold some Northern cities for ransom.
The ships had an length between perpendiculars of , a beam of , and a draught of at deep load.
They displaced .
The hull was divided by 12 watertight bulkheads and the ships had a double bottom beneath the engine and boiler rooms.
Their crew consisted of 152 officers and ratings.
The "Scorpion"-class ships had two horizontal direct-acting steam engines, built by Lairds, each driving a single propeller shaft, using steam provided by four tubular boilers.
The engines produced a total of which gave the ships a maximum speed of .
"Wivern" reached a maximum speed just over during her sea trials on 4 October 1865.
The ships carried of coal, enough to steam at .
They were barque-rigged with three masts.
"Wivern" was the first ship to have tripod masts to reduce interference with the firing arcs of the gun turrets.
The funnel was made semi-retractable to reduce wind resistance while under sail.
No ordnance had been ordered by the Confederates before the ships were seized in 1863, but in British service they mounted a pair of 9-inch rifled muzzle-loading guns in each turret.
The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells.
According to Parkes, going from full depression to full elevation supposedly took one hour in smooth water and with an even keel!
The "Scorpion"-class ships had a complete waterline belt of wrought iron that was thick amidships and thinned to at the bow and at the stern.
It completely covered the hull from the upper deck to below the waterline.
The armour protection of the turrets was quite elaborate.
The inside of the turret was lined with of iron boiler plate to which T-shaped beams were bolted.
The space between the beams was filled with of teak.
This was covered by an iron lattice thick that was covered in turn by of teak.
The iron plates were bolted to the outside using bolts that ran through to the interior iron "skin".
The area around the gun ports was reinforced by 4.5-inch plates to give a total thickness of 10 inches.
The turret roof consisted of T-shaped beams covered by iron plates.
========,2,Construction and career.
The British government seized the pair of ironclads in October 1863, before they could be completed.
In early 1864, the Admiralty purchased both for the Royal Navy.
Completed in October 1865, "Wivern" was assigned to the Channel Fleet until 1868.
After a refit that reduced her sailing rig from a barque to a schooner, the "Wivern" served briefly as a guard ship at Hull and then went into reserve.
In 1880 "Wivern" was dispatched to Hong Kong.
The naval architect Edward James Reed wrote: "the turret-ship 'Wivern', belonging to the Royal Navy, has a low free-board (about 4 feet), and is very lightly armoured, while her armament is also very light.
Yet on one occasion her behaviour at sea was so bad that she had to be brought head to wind in order to prevent her shipping large, and, of course, dangerous, quantities of water, the extreme angle of roll rising to 27 degrees each way."
One of her commanding officers was Captain Hugh Talbot Burgoyne, VC who was later appointed the commanding officer of .
"Wivern" remained in Hong Kong until sold for scrap in 1922, having been reduced to harbor duties from 1904.
