========,1,preface.
The Crookes radiometer, also known as a light mill, consists of an airtight glass bulb, containing a partial vacuum.
Inside are a set of vanes which are mounted on a spindle.
The vanes rotate when exposed to light, with faster rotation for more intense light, providing a quantitative measurement of electromagnetic radiation intensity.
The reason for the rotation was a cause of much scientific debate in the ten years following the invention of the device, but in 1879 the currently accepted explanation for the rotation was published.
Today the device is mainly used in physics education as a demonstration of a heat engine run by light energy.
It was invented in 1873 by the chemist Sir William Crookes as the by-product of some chemical research.
In the course of very accurate quantitative chemical work, he was weighing samples in a partially evacuated chamber to reduce the effect of air currents, and noticed the weighings were disturbed when sunlight shone on the balance.
Investigating this effect, he created the device named after him.
It is still manufactured and sold as an educational aid or curiosity.
========,2,General description.
The radiometer is made from a glass bulb from which much of the air has been removed to form a partial vacuum.
Inside the bulb, on a low friction spindle, is a rotor with several (usually four) vertical lightweight metal vanes spaced equally around the axis.
The vanes are polished or white on one side and black on the other.
When exposed to sunlight, artificial light, or infrared radiation (even the heat of a hand nearby can be enough), the vanes turn with no apparent motive power, the dark sides retreating from the radiation source and the light sides advancing.
Cooling the radiometer causes rotation in the opposite direction.
========,3,Effect observations.
The effect begins to be observed at partial vacuum pressures of a few torr (several hundred pascals), reaches a peak at around 10 torr (1 pascal) and has disappeared by the time the vacuum reaches 10 torr (10 pascal) (see explanations note 1).
At these very high vacuums the effect of photon radiation pressure on the vanes can be observed in very sensitive apparatus (see Nichols radiometer) but this is insufficient to cause rotation.
========,2,Thermodynamic explanation.
========,3,Movement with black-body absorption.
When a radiant energy source is directed at a Crookes radiometer, the radiometer becomes a heat engine.
The operation of a heat engine is based on a difference in temperature that is converted to a mechanical output.
In this case, the black side of the vane becomes hotter than the other side, as radiant energy from a light source warms the black side by black-body absorption faster than the silver or white side.
The internal air molecules are heated up when they touch the black side of the vane.
The details of exactly how this moves the warmer side of the vane forward are given in the section below.
The internal temperature rises as the black vanes impart heat to the air molecules, but the molecules are cooled again when they touch the bulb's glass surface, which is at ambient temperature.
This heat loss through the glass keeps the internal bulb temperature steady so that the two sides of the vanes can develop a temperature difference.
The white or silver side of the vanes are slightly warmer than the internal air temperature but cooler than the black side, as some heat conducts through the vane from the black side.
The two sides of each vane must be thermally insulated to some degree so that the silver or white side does not immediately reach the temperature of the black side.
If the vanes are made of metal, then the black or white paint can be the insulation.
The glass stays much closer to ambient temperature than the temperature reached by the black side of the vanes.
The higher external air pressure helps conduct heat away from the glass.
The air pressure inside the bulb needs to strike a balance between too low and too high.
A strong vacuum inside the bulb does not permit motion, because there are not enough air molecules to cause the air currents that propel the vanes and transfer heat to the outside before both sides of each vane reach thermal equilibrium by heat conduction through the vane material.
High inside pressure inhibits motion because the temperature differences are not enough to push the vanes through the higher concentration of air: there is too much air resistance for "eddy currents" to occur, and any slight air movement caused by the temperature difference is damped by the higher pressure before the currents can "wrap around" to the other side.
========,3,Movement with black-body radiation.
When the radiometer is heated in the absence of a light source, it turns in the forward direction (i.e.
black sides trailing).
If a person's hands are placed around the glass without touching it, the vanes will turn slowly or not at all, but if the glass is touched to warm it quickly, they will turn more noticeably.
Directly heated glass gives off enough infrared radiation to turn the vanes, but glass blocks much of the far-infrared radiation from a source of warmth not in contact with it.
However, near-infrared and visible light more easily penetrate the glass.
If the glass is cooled quickly in the absence of a strong light source by putting ice on the glass or placing it in the freezer with the door almost closed, it turns backwards (i.e.
the silver sides trail).
This demonstrates black-body radiation from the black sides of the vanes rather than black-body absorption.
The wheel turns backwards because the net exchange of heat between the black sides and the environment initially cools the black sides faster than the white sides.
Upon reaching equilibrium, typically after a minute or two, reverse rotation ceases.
This contrasts with sunlight, with which forward rotation can be maintained all day.
========,2,All-black light mill.
To rotate, a light mill does not have to be coated with different colors across each vane.
In 2009, researchers at the University of Texas, Austin created a monocolored light mill which has four curved vanes; each vane forms a convex and a concave surface.
The light mill is uniformly coated by gold nanocrystals, which are a strong light absorber.
Upon exposure, due to geometric effect, the convex side of the vane receives more photon energy than the concave side does, and subsequently the gas molecules receive more heat from the convex side than from the concave side.
At rough vacuum, this asymmetric heating effect generates a net gas movement across each vane, from the concave side to the convex side, as shown by the researchers' Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) modeling.
The gas movement causes the light mill to rotate with the concave side moving forward, due to Newton's Third Law.
This monocolored design promotes the fabrication of micrometer- or nanometer- scaled light mills, as it is difficult to pattern materials of distinct optical properties within a very narrow, three-dimensional space.
========,2,Nanoscale light mill.
In 2010 researchers at the University of California, Berkeley succeeded in building a nanoscale light mill that works on an entirely different principle to the Crookes radiometer.
A gold light mill, only 100 nanometers in diameter, was built and illuminated by laser light that had been tuned.
The possibility of doing this had been suggested by the Princeton physicist Richard Beth in 1936.
The torque was greatly enhanced by the resonant coupling of the incident light to plasmonic waves in the gold structure.
