========,1,preface.
Manhattan Christian College (MCC) is an institution of higher learning located in Manhattan, Kansas, USA.
Manhattan Christian College was founded in 1927 as Christian Workers University.
It initially opened for classes on September 19, 1927.
The school's name was changed to Manhattan Bible College in 1930, and on July 1, 1971, the name was changed again to Manhattan Christian College.
MCC is historically affiliated with nondenominational, independent Christian Churches and Churches of Christ of the Restoration Movement.
While many of the students and all the professors have a background in the Christian Church/Churches of Christ congregations, students from various denominational backgrounds are encouraged and welcomed.
MCC has had seven presidents: E.C.
Sanderson (1927), T.H.
Johnson (1928-1952), O. Ray Burgess (1952), Burton B. Thurston (1952-1955), W.F.
Lown (1955-1982), Kenneth Cable (1982-2005) and Kevin Ingram (2005–present)  The school is accredited by the Higher Learning Commission North Central Association of Colleges and Schools and the Association for Biblical Higher Education.
========,2,Degree programs.
Programs of study include both single and dual-degrees (in cooperation with Kansas State University, as well as an adult degree completion program both on campus and online.
The college offers bachelor of arts or science degrees in various ministerial fields.
The Leadership Education for Adult Development (LEAD) degree completion program assists individuals interested in either Management & Ethics or Biblical Leadership, allowing them to complete a college degree for personal and career development.
MCC also offers these two degree-completion programs through online distance education.
MCC programs of study can be taken in conjunction with numerous programs at Kansas State University allowing students to earn two bachelor's degrees in five years.
Students may also choose to pursue a 2-year associate degree, or simply obtain a 1-year certificate as well.
========,2,Athletics.
The college offers many sports programs including men's and women's soccer, men's and women's basketball, women's volleyball, men's baseball, and men's and women's cross country which was recently added for the Fall 2010 season.
In 2014, the College changed its athletics nickname to Thunder.
In conjunction with its athletic programs, MCC provides a unique and vibrant spiritual community.
The program competes in the National Christian College Athletic Association Division II and is a member of the Midwest Christian College Conference.
