========,1,preface.
Shipbuilding is the construction of ships and other floating vessels.
It normally takes place in a specialized facility known as a shipyard.
Shipbuilders, also called shipwrights, follow a specialized occupation that traces its roots to before recorded history.
Shipbuilding and ship repairs, both commercial and military, are referred to as "naval engineering".
The construction of boats is a similar activity called boat building.
The dismantling of ships is called ship breaking.
========,2,History.
========,3,Prehistory.
Archaeological evidence indicates that humans arrived on Borneo at least 120,000 years ago, probably by sea from the Asian mainland during an ice age period when the sea was lower and distances between islands shorter (See History of Borneo and Papua New Guinea).
The ancestors of Australian Aborigines and New Guineans also went across the Lombok Strait to Sahul by boat over 50,000 years ago.
========,3,4th millennium BC.
Evidence from Ancient Egypt shows that the early Egyptians knew how to assemble planks of wood into a ship hull as early as 3000 BC.
The Archaeological Institute of America reports that some of the oldest ships yet unearthed are known as the Abydos boats.
These are a group of 14 ships discovered in Abydos that were constructed of wooden planks which were "sewn" together.
Discovered by Egyptologist David O'Connor of New York University, woven straps were found to have been used to lash the planks together, and reeds or grass stuffed between the planks helped to seal the seams.
Because the ships are all buried together and near a mortuary belonging to Pharaoh Khasekhemwy, originally they were all thought to have belonged to him, but one of the 14 ships dates to 3000 BC, and the associated pottery jars buried with the vessels also suggest earlier dating.
The ship dating to 3000 BC was about 25 m, 75 feet long and is now thought to perhaps have belonged to an earlier pharaoh.
According to professor O'Connor, the 5,000-year-old ship may have even belonged to Pharaoh Aha.
========,3,3rd millennium BC.
Early Egyptians also knew how to assemble planks of wood with treenails to fasten them together, using pitch for caulking the seams.
The "Khufu ship", a 43.6-meter vessel sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza in the Fourth Dynasty around 2500 BC, is a full-size surviving example which may have fulfilled the symbolic function of a solar barque.
Early Egyptians also knew how to fasten the planks of this ship together with mortise and tenon joints.
The oldest known tidal dock in the world was built around 2500 BC during the Harappan civilisation at Lothal near the present day Mangrol harbour on the Gujarat coast in India.
Other ports were probably at Balakot and Dwarka.
However, it is probable that many small-scale ports, and not massive ports, were used for the Harappan maritime trade.
Ships from the harbour at these ancient port cities established trade with Mesopotamia.
Shipbuilding and boatmaking may have been prosperous industries in ancient India.
Native labourers may have manufactured the flotilla of boats used by Alexander the Great to navigate across the Hydaspes and even the Indus, under Nearchos.
The Indians also exported teak for shipbuilding to ancient Persia.
Other references to Indian timber used for shipbuilding is noted in the works of Ibn Jubayr.
========,3,2nd millennium BC.
The ships of Ancient Egypt's Eighteenth Dynasty were typically about 25 meters (80 ft) in length, and had a single mast, sometimes consisting of two poles lashed together at the top making an "A" shape.
They mounted a single square sail on a yard, with an additional spar along the bottom of the sail.
These ships could also be oar propelled.
The ocean and sea going ships of Ancient Egypt were constructed with cedar wood, most likely hailing from Lebanon.
The ships of Phoenicia seem to have been of a similar design.
========,3,1st millennium BC.
The naval history of China stems back to the Spring and Autumn period (722 BC–481 BC) of the ancient Chinese Zhou Dynasty.
The Chinese built large rectangular barges known as "castle ships", which were essentially floating fortresses complete with multiple decks with guarded ramparts.
There is considerable knowledge regarding shipbuilding and seafaring in the ancient Mediterranean.
========,3,Early 1st millennium AD.
The ancient Chinese also built ramming vessels as in the Greco-Roman tradition of the trireme, although oar-steered ships in China lost favor very early on since it was in the 1st century China that the stern-mounted rudder was first developed.
This was dually met with the introduction of the Han Dynasty junk ship design in the same century.
Archeological investigations done at Portus near Rome have revealed inscriptions indicating the existence of a 'guild of shipbuilders' during the time of Hadrian.
========,3,Medieval Europe, Song China, Abbasid Caliphate, Pacific Islanders.
Viking longships were an advancement from the traditional clinker-built hulls of plank boards tied together with leather thongs.
Sometime around the 12th century, northern European ships began to be built with a straight sternpost, enabling the mounting of a rudder, which was much more durable than a steering oar held over the side.
Development in the Middle Ages favored "round ships", with a broad beam and heavily curved at both ends.
Another important ship type was the galley which was constructed with both sails and oars.
An insight into ship building in the North Sea/Baltic areas of the early medieval period was found at Sutton Hoo, England, where a ship was buried with a chieftain.
The ship was long and, wide.
Upward from the keel, the hull was made by overlapping nine planks on either side with rivets fastening the oaken planks together.
It could hold upwards of thirty men.
The first extant treatise on shipbuilding was written c. 1436 by Michael of Rhodes, a man who began his career as an oarsman on a Venetian galley in 1401 and worked his way up into officer positions.
He wrote and illustrated a book that contains a treatise on ship building, a treatise on mathematics, much material on astrology, and other materials.
His treatise on shipbuilding treats three kinds of galleys and two kinds of round ships.
Outside Medieval Europe, great advances were being made in shipbuilding.
The shipbuilding industry in Imperial China reached its height during the Song Dynasty, Yuan Dynasty, and early Ming Dynasty, building commercial vessels that by the end of this period were to reach a size and sophistication far exceeding that of contemporary Europe.
The mainstay of China's merchant and naval fleets was the junk, which had existed for centuries, but it was at this time that the large ships based on this design were built.
During the Sung period (960–1279 AD), the establishment of China's first official standing navy in 1132 AD and the enormous increase in maritime trade abroad (from Heian Japan to Fatimid Egypt) allowed the shipbuilding industry in provinces like Fujian to thrive as never before.
The largest seaports in the world were in China and included Guangzhou, Quanzhou, and Xiamen.
In the Islamic world, shipbuilding thrived at Basra and Alexandria, the dhow, felucca, baghlah and the sambuk, became symbols of successful maritime trade around the Indian Ocean; from the ports of East Africa to Southeast Asia and the ports of Sindh and Hind (India) during the Abbasid period.
At this time islands spread over vast distances across the Pacific Ocean were being colonised by the Melenesians and Polynesians, who built giant canoes and progressed to great catamarans.
========,3,Early modern.
With the development of the carrack, the west moved into a new era of ship construction by building the first regular oceangoing vessels.
In a relatively short time, these ships grew to an unprecedented size, complexity and cost.
Shipyards became large industrial complexes and the ships built were financed by consortia of investors.
These considerations led to the documentation of design and construction practices in what had previously been a secretive trade run by master shipwrights, and ultimately led to the field of naval architecture, where professional designers and draughtsmen played an increasingly important role.
Even so, construction techniques changed only very gradually.
The ships of the Napoleonic Wars were still built more or less to the same basic plan as those of the Spanish Armada of two centuries earlier but there had been numerous subtle improvements in ship design and construction throughout this period.
For instance, the introduction of tumblehome; adjustments to the shapes of sails and hulls; the introduction of the wheel; the introduction of hardened copper fastenings below the waterline; the introduction of copper sheathing as a deterrent to shipworm and fouling; etc.
========,3,Industrial Revolution.
The industrial revolution made possible the use of new materials and designs that radically altered shipbuilding.
Iron was gradually adopted in ship construction, initially in discrete areas in a wooden hull needing greater strength, (e.g.
as deck knees, hanging knees, knee riders and the other sharp joints, ones in which a curved, progressive joint could not be achieved).
Then, in the form of plates riveted together and made watertight, it was used to form the hull itself.
Initially copying wooden construction traditions with a frame over which the hull was fastened, Isambard Kingdom Brunel's of 1843 was the first radical new design, being built entirely of wrought iron.
Despite her success, and the great savings in cost and space provided by the iron hull, compared to a copper sheathed counterpart, there remained problems with fouling due to the adherence of weeds and barnacles.
As a result, composite construction remained the dominant approach where fast ships were required, with wooden timbers laid over an iron frame ("Cutty Sark" is a famous example).
Later "Great Britain"s iron hull was sheathed in wood to enable it to carry a copper-based sheathing.
Brunel's represented the next great development in shipbuilding.
Built in association with John Scott Russell, it used longitudinal stringers for strength, inner and outer hulls, and bulkheads to form multiple watertight compartments.
Steel also supplanted wrought iron when it became readily available in the latter half of the 19th century, providing great savings when compared with iron in cost and weight.
Wood continued to be favored for the decks.
Sailing ship technology vastly improved during the early Industrial Revolution (between 1760 and 1825), as "the risk of being wrecked for Atlantic shipping fell by one third, and of foundering by two thirds, reflecting improvements in seaworthiness and navigation respectively."
The improvements in seaworthiness have been credited to "replacing the traditional stepped deck ship with stronger flushed decked ones derived from Indian designs, and the increasing use of iron reinforcement."
During World War II, the need for cargo ships was so great that construction time for Liberty ships went from initially eight months or longer, down to weeks or even days.
They employed production line and prefabrication techniques such as those used in shipyards today.
The total number of dry-cargo ships built in the United States in a 15-year period just before the war was a grand total of two.
During the war, thousands of Liberty ships and Victory ships were built, many of them in shipyards that didn't exist before the war.
And, they were built by a workforce consisting largely of women and other inexperienced workers who had never seen a ship before (or even the ocean).
========,2,Worldwide shipbuilding industry.
After the Second World War, shipbuilding (which encompasses the shipyards, the marine equipment manufacturers, and many related service and knowledge providers) grew as an important and strategic industry in a number of countries around the world.
This importance stems from:
***LIST***.
Historically, the industry has suffered from the absence of global rules and a tendency towards (state-supported) over-investment due to the fact that shipyards offer a wide range of technologies, employ a significant number of workers, and generate income as the shipbuilding market is global.
Shipbuilding is therefore an attractive industry for developing nations.
Japan used shipbuilding in the 1950s and 1960s to rebuild its industrial structure; South Korea started to make shipbuilding a strategic industry in the 1970s, and China is now in the process of repeating these models with large state-supported investments in this industry.
Conversely, Croatia is privatising its shipbuilding industry.
As a result, the world shipbuilding market suffers from over-capacities, depressed prices (although the industry experienced a price increase in the period 2003–2005 due to strong demand for new ships which was in excess of actual cost increases), low profit margins, trade distortions and widespread subsidisation.
All efforts to address the problems in the OECD have so far failed, with the 1994 international shipbuilding agreement never entering into force and the 2003–2005 round of negotiations being paused in September 2005 after no agreement was possible.
After numerous efforts to restart the negotiations these were formally terminated in December 2010.
The OECD's Council Working Party on Shipbuilding (WP6) will continue its efforts to identify and progressively reduce factors that distort the shipbuilding market.
Where state subsidies have been removed and domestic industrial policies do not provide support in high labor cost countries, shipbuilding has gone into decline.
The British shipbuilding industry is a prime example of this with its industries suffering badly from the 1960s.
In the early 1970s British yards still had the capacity to build all types and sizes of merchant ships but today they have been reduced to a small number specialising in defence contracts, luxury yachts and repair work.
Decline has also occurred in other European countries, although to some extent this has reduced by protective measures and industrial support policies.
In the U.S.A, the Jones Act (which places restrictions on the ships that can be used for moving domestic cargoes) has meant that merchant shipbuilding has continued, albeit at a reduced rate, but such protection has failed to penalise shipbuilding inefficiencies.
The consequence of this is that contract prices are far higher than those of any other country building oceangoing ships.
========,3,Present day shipbuilding.
China is the world's largest shipbuilder.
The country has been an emerging low-cost, high-volume shipbuilder that overtook South Korea during the 2008–2010 global financial crisis as they won new orders for medium and small-sized container ships.
South Korea's "big three" shipbuilders, Hyundai Heavy Industries, Samsung Heavy Industries, and Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering, dominate the global market for large container ships.
As freight rates continue to decline into 2016, production delays, and overcapacity in the industry have led South Korean shipbuilders into financial distress.
Consequently, significant market share has been ceded to their Chinese and Japanese rivals.
Japan had been the dominant ship building nation from the 1960s through to the end of 1990s but gradually lost its competitive advantage to China and South Korea which had lower wages, strong government backing and cheaper currencies.
The market share of European ship builders began to decline in the 1960s as they lost work to Japan in the same way Japan most recently lost their work to China and South Korea.
Over the four years from 2007, the total number of employees in the European shipbuilding industry declined from 150,000 to 115,000.
The output of the United States also underwent a similar change.
========,3,Modern shipbuilding manufacturing techniques.
Modern shipbuilding makes considerable use of prefabricated sections.
Entire multi-deck segments of the hull or superstructure will be built elsewhere in the yard, transported to the building dock or slipway, then lifted into place.
This is known as "block construction".
The most modern shipyards pre-install equipment, pipes, electrical cables, and any other components within the blocks, to minimize the effort needed to assemble or install components deep within the hull once it is welded together.
Ship design work, also called naval architecture, may be conducted using a ship model basin.
Previously, loftsmen at the mould lofts of shipyards were responsible for taking the dimensions, and details from drawings and plans and translating this information into templates, battens, ordinates, cutting sketches, profiles, margins and other data.
However, since the early 1970s computer-aided design (CAD) became normal for the shipbuilding design and lofting process.
Modern ships, since roughly 1940, have been produced almost exclusively of welded steel.
Early welded steel ships used steels with inadequate fracture toughness, which resulted in some ships suffering catastrophic brittle fracture structural cracks (see problems of the Liberty ship).
Since roughly 1950, specialized steels such as ABS Steels with good properties for ship construction have been used.
Although it is commonly accepted that modern steel has eliminated brittle fracture in ships, some controversy still exists.
Brittle fracture of modern vessels continues to occur from time to time because grade A and grade B steel of unknown toughness or fracture appearance transition temperature (FATT) in ships' side shells can be less than adequate for all ambient conditions.
========,3,Ship repair industry.
All ships need repair work at some point in their working lives.
A part of these jobs must be carried out under the supervision of the classification society.
A lot of maintenance is carried out while at sea or in port by ship's crew.
However a large number of repair and maintenance works can only be carried out while the ship is out of commercial operation, in a ship repair yard.
Prior to undergoing repairs, a tanker must dock at a deballasting station for completing the tank cleaning operations and pumping ashore its slops (dirty cleaning water and hydrocarbon residues).
