========,1,preface.
Ericsson Television, formerly Tandberg Television, is a company providing MPEG-4 AVC, MPEG-2 and HEVC encoding decoding and control solutions, plus stream processing, packaging, network adaption and related products, for C+D, IPTV, Cable, DTT, Sat DTH and OTT.
The global headquarters are located in Southampton, England with additional offices in Rennes, France.
The company was honoured with its first Technology & Engineering Emmy Award in 2008 for the development of interactive Video-on-Demand infrastructure and signaling, leading to large scale VOD implementations.
It was also awarded another Emmy® in 2009 for Pioneering Development of MPEG-4 AVC systems for HDTV.
Then in 2011, for the Pioneering Development and Deployment of Active Format Description Technology and System.
In 2013, the company acquired another Emmy® award for the Pioneering Development Of Video On Demand (VOD) Dynamic Advertising Insertion.
Recently in 2014, Ericsson got its fifth Emmy® Award recognition for its work in developing pioneering JPEG2000 interoperability technology.
========,2,History.
Tandberg is a long-standing Norwegian company whose history goes back to the 1930s when it supplied domestic radio equipment.
It grew into other areas during the decades after WW2 including a well respected audio equipment manufacturer and its reel to reel tape recorders were sought after by HiFi enthusiasts.
The Kjelsas factory also started producing TV sets in 1960, and in 1966 a second TV plant was opened in Kjeller in Skedsmo.
Color TV's were added to their lineup in 1969.
In 1972, Tandberg purchased Radionette, another large Norwegian electronics firm that has just begun focusing on televisions.
By 1976, TV's were Tandberg's major product and their factories employed 3,500.
However, that same year a major economic downturn seriously disrupted the company, and by 1978 it was insolvent.
A shareholder revolt removed Vebjorn Tandberg from control of the company, and he committed suicide in August.
In December the company declared bankruptcy.
Tandberg Television, originally with headquarters in Lillestrom near Oslo, Norway, was formed in 1979 when the original Tandberg company split into Tandberg, Tandberg Data, and Tandberg Television.
========,3,After the breakup of 1979.
In 1999 Tandberg Television entered into a £170 million agreement to acquire all the assets of NDS Group’s Digital-TV products business, the Digital Broadcasting Business (DBB), a subsidiary of The News Corporation group.
After the acquisition, Tandberg Television could offer digital video compression encoders, multiplexers and modulation products for large satellite DTH systems, terrestrial networks and mobile news gathering solutions.
NDS Group itself was a merger in 1996 between News Corp's existing News Data Communications (NDC) based in Israel, a company that supplied smart cards to pay TV operators like Sky TV, and Digi-Media Vision (DMV) a video compression company that News had acquired in 1995 and had been the Advanced Products Division [APD] of National Transcommunications Limited [NTL] in the UK.
NTL was itself established in 1990 as the privatised Engineering arm of the Independent Broadcasting Authority (IBA), the UK commercial broadcasting regulator and operator of all commercial terrestrial television and radio transmitters.
APD was the Experimental and Development (E&D) department of the IBA.
Much earlier, in 1987, Tandberg Television and the IBA's E&D and Satellite Engineering groups had worked together to build a satellite broadcasting system for the UK based on the ill-fated MAC system operated by Sky's rival British Satellite Broadcasting (BSB).
BSB and Sky merged in 1990 to form British Sky Broadcasting (BSkyB) which has become a significant broadcaster in the UK.
Since 1999, Tandberg Television has acquired four U.S-based digital media companies.
In October 2005, they acquired Los Angeles-based Goldpocket Interactive, an interactive technology provider for digital television, the Internet and wireless/mobile networks.
Further, in February 2006, they acquired SkyStream Networks, a provider of IP MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 AVC video delivery solutions, based in Sunnyvale, California.
Later the same year, they acquired Los Angeles-based Internet TV software developer Zetools.
In April 2007, Tandberg Television was acquired by Ericsson.
Ericsson Television operates as an independent entity.
