========,1,preface.
========,2,Early depictions.
The earliest surviving mention of Mordred (Referred to as "Medraut") occurs in the "Annales Cambriae" entry for the year 537, which references his name in association with the Battle of Camlann.
This brief entry gives no information as to whether Mordred killed or was killed by Arthur, or even if he was fighting against him.
As Leslie Alcock in particular has noted, the reader assumes this in the light of later tradition.
The "Annales" themselves were completed between 960 and 970, meaning that although their authors likely drew from older material they cannot be considered as a contemporary source having been compiled 400 years after the events they describe.
Meilyr Brydydd, writing at the same time as Geoffrey of Monmouth, mentions Mordred in his lament for the death of Gruffudd ap Cyan (d. 1137).
As O.J.
Padel notes, he describes Gruffudd as having "eissor Medrawd" ('the nature of Medrawd') as to have valour in battle.
Similarly, Padel notes that Gwalchmai ap Meilyr praised Madog ap Maredudd, king of Powys (d.1160) as having "Arthur gerdernyd, menwyd Medrawd" ('Arthur's strength, the good nature of Medrawd').
This would support the idea that early perceptions of Mordred were largely positive.
========,2,In Arthurian legend.
The earliest account of Mordred (Referred to as "Modredus") is found in Geoffrey of Monmouth's "Historia Regum Britanniae", written around 1136.
Here, he is portrayed as the nephew of and traitor to Arthur.
The account describes Arthur leaving Mordred in charge of his throne as he crossed the English Channel to wage war on Emperor Lucius of Rome.
During this absence, Mordred crowns himself king and lives in an adulterous union with Arthur's wife, Guinevere.
Geoffrey does not make it clear how complicit Guinevere is with Mordred's actions, simply stating that the Queen had "broken her vows" and "about this matter... [he] prefers to say nothing."
This forces Arthur to return to Britain to fight at the Battle of Camlann, where Mordred is ultimately slain.
Arthur, having been mortally wounded in battle, is sent to Avalon.
A number of Welsh sources also refer to Medraut, usually in relation to Camlann.
One triad, based on Geoffrey's "Historia", provides an account of his betrayal of Arthur; in another, he is described as the author of one of the "Three Unrestrained Ravagings of the Isle of Britain" – he came to Arthur's court at Kelliwic in Cornwall, devoured all of the food and drink, and even dragged Gwenhwyfar (Guinevere) from her throne and beat her.
Medraut is never considered Arthur's son in Welsh texts, only his nephew, though "The Dream of Rhonabwy" mentions that the king had been his foster father.
However, Mordred's later characterization as the king's villainous son has a precedent in the figure of Amr, a son of Arthur's known from only two references.
The more important of these, found in an appendix to the "Historia Britonum", describes his marvellous grave beside the Herefordshire spring where he had been slain by his own father in some unchronicled tragedy.
What connection exists between the stories of Amr and Mordred, if there is one, has never been satisfactorily explained.
In Geoffrey and certain other sources such as the "Alliterative Morte Arthure", Mordred marries Guinevere, seemingly consensually, after he steals the throne.
However, in later writings like the Lancelot-Grail Cycle and Thomas Malory's "Le Morte d'Arthur", Guinevere is not treated as a traitor and she flees Mordred's proposal and hides in the Tower of London.
Adultery is still tied to her role in these later romances, however, but Mordred has been replaced with Lancelot.
========,2,In later works.
Virtually everywhere Mordred appears, his name is synonymous with treachery.
He appears in Dante's "Inferno" in the lowest circle of Hell, set apart for traitors: "him who, at one blow, had chest and shadow / shattered by Arthur's hand;" (Canto XXXII).
A few works of the Middle Ages and today, however, portray Mordred as less a traitor and more a conflicted opportunist, or even a victim of fate.
The 14th century Scottish chronicler John of Fordun even claimed that Mordred was the rightful heir to the throne of Britain, as Arthur was an illegitimate child (in his account, Mordred was the legitimate son of Lot and Anna.)
This sentiment was elaborated upon by Walter Bower and by Hector Boece, who in his "Historia Gentis Scotorum" goes so far as to say Arthur and Gawain were traitors and villains who stole the throne from Mordred.
Even Malory, who depicts Mordred as a villain, notes that the people of England rallied to him because, "with Arthur was none other life but war and strife, and with Sir Mordred was great joy and bliss".
Mordred is especially prominent in popular Arthurian texts of the modern era, especially in fiction, film, and television, and comics.
In Stephen King's The Dark Tower series, the character Mordred Deschain is the son of Roland Deschain (White Father), the Crimson King (Red Father), Susannah Dean, (Black Mother), and Mia (White Mother), whose conception was facilitated by the demonic spirit who helped Jake enter Mid-World for the second time.
In keeping with the historical theme of the name Mordred, the character is a vile and murderous creature, bent on the destruction of Roland Deschain, though simultaneously driven by instinctual and emotional urges beyond his control.
He also appears as a recurring character in the BBC television series "Merlin", portrayed by Asa Butterfield as a child and Alexander Vlahos as an adult, where he is a young Druid with magical gifts similar to the titular character.
He later becomes one of Camelot's knights.
Mordred appears in Philip Reeve's Here Lies Arthur, as Medrawt.
He is Arthur's half-sister's older son, the younger being Bedwyr (Bedivere).
He avenges his brother's murder by Arthur, for betrayal with Arthur's wife, Gwenhwyfar (Guenivere), by raising an army, attacking Arthur, killing him at Camlann, and taking the city of Aquae Sulis (ruled by Arthur) for himself.
========,2,Family.
Tradition varies on his relationship to Arthur, but he is best known today as Arthur's illegitimate son by his half-sister Morgaine, though in many modern adaptations Morgaine is merged with the character of Morgan le Fay.
In earlier literature, he was considered the legitimate son of Morgause, also known as Anna, with her husband King Lot of Orkney.
His brothers or half-brothers are Gawain, Agravain, Gaheris, and Gareth.
Geoffrey and the Lancelot-Grail Cycle have Mordred being succeeded by his sons.
Stories always number them as two, though they are usually not named, nor is their mother.
The 18th century Welsh antiquarian Lewis Morris, based on statements made by the Scottish chronicler Hector Boece, suggested that Medrawd had a wife, Cwyllog (also spelled Cywyllog), daughter of Caw.
Another late Welsh tradition was that Medrawd's wife was Gwenhwy(f)ach, sister of Gwenhwyfar.
In Geoffrey's version, after the Battle of Camlann, Constantine is appointed Arthur's successor.
However, Mordred's two sons and their Saxon allies rise against him.
He defeats them, and one of them flees to sanctuary in the Church of Amphibalus in Winchester while the other hides in a London friary.
Constantine tracks them down, and kills them before the altars in their respective hiding places.
This act invokes the vengeance of God, and three years later Constantine is killed by his nephew Aurelius Conanus.
Geoffrey's account of the episode may be based on Constantine's murder of two "royal youths" as mentioned by the 6th-century writer Gildas.
The elder of Mordred's sons is named Melehan or some derivation in the Lancelot-Grail and Post-Vulgate Cycles.
In these texts, Lancelot and his men return to Britain to dispatch Melehan and his brother after receiving a letter from the dying Gawain.
In the ensuing battle Melehan slays Sir Lionel, son of King Bors the Elder and brother to Sir Bors the Younger.
Bors kills him to avenge his brother's death, while Lancelot slays the unnamed younger brother.
