========,1,preface.
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (sometimes abbreviated to DS9) is a science fiction television series set in the "Star Trek" universe in the Milky Way galaxy, in the years 2369–2375.
In contrast to other "Star Trek" TV shows, it takes place on a space station instead of a starship, so as not to have two series with starships in the same time period.
The starship USS "Defiant" was introduced in season 3, but the Deep Space Nine space station remained the show's primary setting.
The show is noted for its well-developed characters, original and complex plots, and religious themes, and for starring the only black captain in any of the televised "Star Trek" incarnations.
It often showcased darker themes; less physical exploration of space; and, in later seasons, an emphasis on many aspects of war.
"DS9" premiered in 1993 and ran for seven seasons until 1999.
Although rooted in Gene Roddenberry's "Star Trek" universe, it was the first "Trek" spin-off created without Roddenberry's direct involvement, although he did give the concept his blessing shortly before his death in 1991.
The series was created by Rick Berman and Michael Piller at the request of Brandon Tartikoff, and was produced by Paramount Television.
As overall head of Star Trek production, Berman served as executive producer for the series's entire run.
Piller initially served as second executive producer and showrunner, but left the series in 1995 to manage "Star Trek Voyager".
Writer Ira Steven Behr was promoted by Berman to replace Piller as showrunner and held that role for the remainder of the series.
In addition to Berman, Piller, and Behr, key writers included Robert Hewitt Wolfe, Ronald D. Moore, Peter Allan Fields, Bradley Thompson, David Weddle, Hans Beimler and René Echevarria.
"DS9" began while "" was still on the air, and there were a few cameos featuring characters from either show (such as Picard's appearance in the DS9 pilot).
The station appeared in "TNG" during the sixth season episode "".
In addition, two "Next Generation" characters, Miles O'Brien and (from season 4 onwards) Worf, became regular members of "DS9".
The station also appeared in the first part of the "Voyager" pilot episode, "".
========,2,Premise.
"DS9" centers on the formerly Cardassian space station Terok Nor.
After the Bajorans have liberated themselves from the long and brutal Cardassian Occupation, the United Federation of Planets is invited by the Bajoran Provisional Government to administer joint control of the station, which initially orbits Bajor.
The station is renamed Deep Space Nine, and a Starfleet crew is assigned to manage it.
Shortly after their arrival, the Starfleet crew discovers a stable wormhole in Bajoran space leading from the Alpha Quadrant to the Gamma Quadrant, and the station is moved to a strategic position near the wormhole's entrance to safeguard it from the Cardassians.
Deep Space Nine and Bajor quickly become a center for exploration, interstellar trade, political maneuvering, and open conflict.
Threats come not only from Cardassians, Klingons, and Romulans from the Alpha Quadrant, but from the Dominion, an alliance of alien species from the Gamma Quadrant that take up arms alongside the Cardassians against the Federation and its allies.
Deep Space Nine becomes a key military base for the Federation in the Dominion War, and is assigned the starship USS "Defiant" to aid in its protection.
According to co-creator Berman, he and Piller considered setting the new series on a colony planet, but they felt a space station would appeal more to viewers, and would save the money required for a land-based show's on-location shooting.
They did not want the show set aboard a starship because "Star Trek: The Next Generation" was still in production, and in Berman’s words, it "seemed ridiculous to have two shows—two casts of characters—that were off going where no man has gone before."
While its predecessors tended to restore the "status quo ante" at the end of each episode, allowing out-of-order viewing, "DS9" contains story arcs that span episodes and seasons.
One installment often builds upon earlier ones, with several cliffhanger endings.
Michael Piller considered this one of the series's best qualities, allowing repercussions of past episodes to influence future events and forcing characters to "learn that actions have consequences".
This trend was especially noticeable toward the series's finale, by which time the show was intentionally scripted as a serial.
Unlike "Star Trek: The Next Generation", interpersonal conflicts were prominently featured in "DS9".
This was at the suggestion of "Star Trek: The Next Generation"s writers, many of whom also wrote for "DS9", who felt that Roddenberry's prohibition of conflicts within the crew restricted their ability to write compelling dramatic stories.
In Piller's words, "People who come from different places—honorable, noble people—will naturally have conflicts".
========,2,Cast.
========,3,Recurring characters.
The setting of the show—a space station rather than a starship—fostered a rich assortment of recurring characters.
It was not unheard of for "secondary" characters to play as much of a role in an episode as the regular cast, if not more.
For example, "" focused almost entirely on Elim Garak, while "Treachery, Faith, and the Great River" featured Weyoun, with a secondary plot centered on Nog. ""
relied on Nog and holographic crooner Vic Fontaine (James Darren) to carry the story.
Several Cardassian characters figure prominently in "DS9", particularly Gul Dukat, the main villain of the series, played by Marc Alaimo.
A complex character, he undergoes several transformations before ultimately becoming profoundly evil, and Sisko's archenemy by the show's conclusion.
A StarTrek.com article about "Star Trek"s greatest villains described Gul Dukat as "possibly the most complex and developed bad guy in "Star Trek" history".
Elim Garak, portrayed by Andrew Robinson, is the only Cardassian who remains (in exile) on the space station when the Federation and the Bajorans take over.
Widely suspected of being an agent of the Obsidian Order, the feared Cardassian secret police, he maintains that he is merely a simple tailor.
Garak's skills and contacts on Cardassia prove invaluable on several occasions, and he becomes a pivotal figure in the war with the Dominion.
Damar (Casey Biggs) is initially a glinn serving under Gul Dukat aboard the freighter "Groumall", later to become his loyal aide and rise in stature as Dukat regains prominence.
He becomes the new leader of the Cardassian Union when Dukat has an emotional breakdown, precipitated by his daughter's death at the hands of Damar ("Sacrifice of Angels").
As the Dominion War progresses, Damar becomes increasingly dissatisfied with Cardassia's relationship with the Dominion.
The tipping point is reached when the Dominion forms an alliance with the Breen and Cardassia is relegated to a secondary and increasingly marginalized role ("").
Damar forms and leads an insurgency against the Dominion, playing a vital role in its eventual defeat ("What You Leave Behind").
Jeffrey Combs (of "Re-Animator" fame) has stated that he had auditioned for the role of William Riker on "Star Trek: The Next Generation", but when Jonathan Frakes (who won the part) later directed the "DS9" episode "", he recommended Combs for a part.
Combs made his "Star Trek" and "DS9" debut as a one-episode alien named Tiron, before being cast as the Ferengi Brunt and the Vorta Weyoun.
He would go on to appear in 31 episodes of "DS9", playing four distinct characters—five, if one counts the "mirror universe" version of Brunt.
In ", he also became one of the few Star Trek actors to play two distinct roles (Brunt and Weyoun) in the same episode.
He also appeared in the series ", as the Andorian commander Shran.
He is one of few people to have appeared in three of four modern "Star Trek" series.
In addition to Quark and his brother Rom (Max Grodénchik), several other Ferengi had recurring roles, among them their shrewd mother Ishka (Andrea Martin, later Cecily Adams), who eventually engineers a social revolution on the Ferengi home world, Rom's son Nog (Aron Eisenberg), the first Ferengi to join Starfleet, and Grand Nagus Zek (Wallace Shawn), the Ferengi leader.
Though she is Bajoran, the character Leeta (Chase Masterson), a Dabo girl in Quark's bar and later Rom's wife, is often involved with the Ferengi storyline.
After Ishka's social revolution, Grand Nagus Zek names Rom as the Grand Nagus to lead the "new" Ferenginar.
The Klingon Empire plays a more significant role in "DS9" than in any other "Star Trek" series.
Aside from Worf, recurring Klingon characters include Chancellor Gowron (Robert O'Reilly), leader of the Empire, who previously appeared in "The Next Generation".
In one of the series' final episodes, he was challenged and killed by Worf for sending Klingon troops on suicide missions to discredit General Martok (J. G. Hertzler) during the Dominion War; after killing Gowron, Worf passes leadership of the empire to Martok.
Kor, a Klingon character from "Star Trek: The Original Series" resurfaces in three "DS9" episodes.
One of them, "", unites Kor with two other Klingons from the original series: Koloth and Kang.
John Colicos, William Campbell, and Michael Ansara reprised their original series roles.
Morn is a minor character who is a fixture in a bar, spending seven years sitting at Quark's.
According to "The Star Trek Encyclopedia", it became a running joke that, despite the other characters' remarks on how talkative and funny he is, he never speaks a word on camera.
Morn did have a line in the script for pilot episode "Emissary", but it was edited for episode run time, after which the creators conceived the joke that he never talks.
========,2,Episodes.
"Deep Space Nine" debuted in January 1993, half-way through the .
This marked the first time in the history of the franchise that two series were airing concurrently, which would continue until "DS9" ended in 1999.
========,2,Plots.
========,3,Bajor.
In the first episode, Starfleet Commander Benjamin Sisko arrives (along with his young son, Jake) at Deep Space Nine, a space station formerly run by the Cardassians during their oppressive occupation of Bajor, a planet which the space station orbits.
He is assigned to run the station jointly with the newly liberated Bajorans as they recover from the Cardassian occupation, to help pave the way for Bajor's entry into the Federation.
Sisko and Jadzia Dax stumble upon the first stable wormhole ever found and discover that it is inhabited by beings who are not bound by normal space and time.
To the strongly religious people of Bajor, the wormhole aliens are their gods (the Prophets) and the wormhole itself is the long-prophesied Celestial Temple, where they reside.
Sisko himself is hailed as the Emissary of the Prophets, through whom the Prophets primarily act.
This provides the basis for a long-lasting story arc.
Sisko initially considers his role as a religious icon with open discomfort and skepticism, referring to the Prophets simply as "wormhole aliens" and striving to keep his role as commander of the station distinct from any religious obligations that the Bajorans try to place on him.
Later, he becomes more accepting of his role and, by the end of the series, he openly embraces it.
The political and religious implications of this on the Bajorans and its spiritual leaders (most notably, Winn Adami) also provide a central arc that lasts until the end of the series.
========,3,The Maquis.
The station crew early on has to contend with a human resistance group known as the Maquis.
Rooted in the events of "The Next Generation" episode "", in which Native American settlers refuse to leave when their colony world is given to Cardassia as part of a treaty, the Maquis is an example for the show’s exploration of darker themes: its members are Federation citizens who take up arms against Cardassia in defense of their homes, and some—such as Calvin Hudson, a long-time friend of Sisko's, and Michael Eddington, who defects while serving aboard the station—are Starfleet officers.
The show’s sharp departure from traditional "Star Trek" themes can be seen in episodes such as "", in which Eddington complains to Sisko, "Everybody should want to be in the Federation.
Nobody leaves paradise.
In some ways, you’re even worse than the Borg.
At least they tell you about their plans for assimilation.
You assimilate people and they don’t even know it."
The Maquis also allows "DS9" to subvert some longstanding "Star Trek" icons: Thomas Riker, a duplicate of "Enterprise"-D first officer Commander William Riker (also played by Jonathan Frakes; character first appeared in "ST:TNG"s " episode), is revealed in the episode " to be a member of the Maquis who gains access to the station's crew and facilities by impersonating the "Enterprise"'s Riker.
========,3,The Dominion War.
The second-season episode, "" marks the first mention of the Dominion, a ruthless empire in the Gamma Quadrant, though they are not fully introduced until the second-season finale, "The Jem'Hadar".
It is led by "the Founders", a race of shape-shifting Changelings, the same species as station security chief Odo.
They were once persecuted by non-shape-shifters (whom they call "Solids") and they seek to impose "order" upon any who could potentially harm them, which includes nearly all Solids.
The Founders have created or genetically modified races to serve them: the Vorta, sly and subversive diplomats, and the Jem’Hadar, their fearless shock troops.
These races worship the Founders as gods.
At the start of "DS9"’s third season (""), with the threat of a Dominion attack looming from the other side of the wormhole, Commander Sisko returns from Starfleet Headquarters on Earth with the USS "Defiant", a prototype starship that was originally built to fight the Borg.
It remains stationed at Deep Space Nine until season seven, providing an avenue for plot lines away from the station.
With the third season, writers from the now completed "Next Generation" began to write regularly for "DS9".
The Dominion forms an uneasy alliance with the Cardassians in the fifth-season episodes "In Purgatory's Shadow" and "By Inferno's Light" and goes to war with the other major powers of the Alpha Quadrant in the season finale "".
Throughout the series, loyalties and alliances change repeatedly: pacts with the Cardassians are made, broken, and remade; a short war with the Klingons flares up and is settled, and the formerly neutral Romulans ally themselves with the Federation.
This last alliance is made in an attempt to turn the war around, but comes as a result of criminal and duplicitous acts on Sisko and resident Cardassian Garak's part, thus providing an example of the moral ambiguity prevalent in DS9 in comparison to the other "Star Trek" series.
========,3,Section 31.
Another example of "DS9"’s darker nature is the introduction of Section 31, a secret organization dedicated to preserving the Federation way of life at any cost.
This shadow group, introduced in "", justifies its unlawful, unilateral tactics by claiming that it is essential to the continued existence of the Federation.
Section 31 repeatedly states that if you inquire into the matter with the Federation, they will deny Section 31's existence.
Section 31 features prominently in several episodes of the Dominion War arc, especially as it is revealed that it attempted a genocide of the Founders.
========,3,The Ferengi.
In "DS9", the Ferengi are no longer an enemy of the Federation, but rather an economic power whose political neutrality is, for the most part, respected.
A number of episodes explore their capitalistic nature, while others delve into the race’s sexist social norms.
Unlike their depiction in "Star Trek: The Next Generation", where they were generally portrayed simply as sexist buffoons for comedic purposes, in "DS9" they received a more complex depiction, with the female partner (Ishka) of the Grand Nagus leading a women's rights rebellion on the Ferengi homeworld, and Rom, Quark's brother, leading a strike against unfair working conditions in Quark's bar.
Also, Jake Sisko's best friend, Nog, has to deal with Starfleet's more liberal attitudes towards women while Jake learns to deal with his friend's cultural background in a respectful manner rather than risk the loss of their friendship.
Nog later decides to join Starfleet, the first Ferengi to do so.
========,3,The Mirror Universe.
Several episodes of "DS9" explore the theme of the Mirror Universe, first touched upon in the " episode ".
In the second-season episode "", the "DS9" crew first becomes aware of this alternate universe when Kira and Dr. Bashir experience operational difficulties while traveling through the Wormhole and wind up back on the station in the Mirror Universe dominated by the Klingon–Cardassian alliance.
They discover that it is not DS9 to which they have returned but Terok Nor.
Bajor is not friendly and there is no Federation here.
"Terrans", as they are called in this universe, are ruthless barbarians according to the Intendant (Kira's mirror self) – the Terran Empire occupied Bajor for decades much as Cardassia had in the normal universe.
The Klingon–Cardassian alliance eventually formed and Bajor was freed from Terran occupation, later enslaving Terrans as ore miners on the orbiting space station Terok Nor.
Enslaved as they are, the Terran workers liberate themselves and form a resistance movement, as seen in several other "DS9" episodes (", ", "", "The Emperor's New Cloak").
========,2,Production.
"DS9" was the first TV show in the "Star Trek" franchise to use computer-generated imagery (CGI) for exterior space shots.
Although a few other television series, like Babylon 5, were using CGI exclusively to avoid the high expense of model photography, the "Star Trek" franchise had continued to use primarily physical models for exterior space shots because producers felt models provided more realism.
The USS "Defiant" was the first full-fledged starship in the "Star Trek" franchise to have a CGI model used in regular production.
It was first built and animated by VisionArt, which was responsible for the morphing of Odo.
The CGI "Defiant" was featured heavily in the Season 4 episode "Starship Down", where it battled a CGI Jem'Hadar ship in a CGI gas giant's atmosphere.
The series started using Foundation Imaging and Digital Muse in 1997 (Seasons 6 and 7) for its effects as part of the ongoing storyline of the Dominion occupation of the station.
However, the Deep Space Nine station itself remained a physical model throughout the series' seven-year run except for the final scene of the series.
In October 2006, the physical model of the station was sold for $132,000 in an auction at Christie's auction house in New York City.
The opening sequence was likewise modified in the fourth season, most notably by the introduction of CGI inserts of construction work being performed on the station's exterior by suited maintenance crews, and more docking and launching activity by ships, along with subtle colored wisps of nebulae added to the background starfield.
Accordingly, the solo trumpet (preceded by a solo French horn) featured prominently in the main theme by Dennis McCarthy to accentuate the lonely isolation of the outpost was now augmented by a chorus of brass as the station attained a more bustling atmosphere following the presence of the wormhole.
The digital effects were done at TV resolution and thus the series cannot be re-released in HD format without re-doing the special effects.
========,2,Reception.
Although "DS9"s ratings remained solid, it was never as successful as the syndicated "Star Trek: The Next Generation", with approximately 6% versus 11% of US households watched during sweeps months.
However, it continued to perform better than its franchise sibling "Star Trek: Voyager" which averaged around 5% according to the Nielsen ratings.
One factor was the increasingly crowded syndicated marketplace, which provided viewers with a number of alternative television series to follow.
Another factor was the minimal promotion for "DS9", as Paramount focused its efforts on its flagship network show "".
Finally, from 1995 onwards, most of the independent stations joined new networks (UPN and WB), and these primetime shows gradually pushed syndicated programming into less favorable time slots as the US television market expanded from four networks (in 1987 when "TNG" premiered) to six.
========,3,Critical reception.
"DS9" was well received by critics, with "TV Guide" describing it as "the best acted, written, produced and altogether finest" "Star Trek" series.
Despite debuting in the shadow of "The Next Generation", "DS9" achieved a considerable level of success in its own right.
According to a press release through "Newswire" on April 7, 1999, it was the #1 syndicated show in the United States for adults 18–49 and 25–54.
The characters of "DS9" were featured on the cover of "TV Guide" ten times during its run, including several "special issue" editions in which a set of four different-covered versions were printed.
The series won a number of awards.
It was nominated for Emmy Awards every year of its run, including for makeup, cinematography, art direction, special effects, hairstyling, music (direction and composition), and costumes.
Of these, it won two for makeup (for "Captive Pursuit" and "), one for special visual effects (for "), and one for its main title theme music (by composer Dennis McCarthy).
It was also nominated for two Hugo Awards in the category of Best Dramatic Presentation for "" and "Trials and Tribble-ations".
"Deep Space Nine" drew praise from African-American, Latino and other minority viewers for its handling of the minority characters, particularly the Sisko family members.
In addition, actor Alexander Siddig (who portrayed Dr. Bashir) expressed his enthusiasm for the fact that he, with his English accent, unusual screen name at time of casting (Siddig El Fadil), and North African heritage was a main character on a prominent television show despite being not as easily racially identifiable to audiences as many other actors and characters were on TV at the time.
Andrew J. Robinson commented on "DS9" not being as popular as its predecessors: "It's not the most popular because it's the most morally ambiguous...
Whenever you have characters who are gray rather than black and white...
Although they are more interesting, they are more difficult for people to get a handle on.
I loved "DS9" because they were gray, because the characters were not easily definable, but that's not for everybody".
Author Terry J. Erdmann commented: ""DS9" was never as popular as its two predecessors, although it arguably was a more critically acclaimed series".
========,3,Former cast members and staff.
In a 2007 interview with "iF" Magazine, George Takei, who had played the character Hikaru Sulu in "The Original Series", criticized "DS9" for being the polar opposite of Gene Roddenberry's philosophy and vision of the future.
However, D. C. Fontana stated in an interview that Roddenberry would have liked it and its dark themes, since he was a World War II veteran.
Bjo Trimble, one of the major forces behind the letter-writing campaign that helped renew the original series for its third season, commented that she thought Roddenberry would have "come to like "DS9", had he lived to see it," and that "the only reason there were not full battles in early "Trek" is lack of funds to pull it off, and lack of technology to show it.
Otherwise, GR would certainly have added it; he knew what audiences liked".
Roddenberry himself is quoted in "The Making of Star Trek DS9" as having doubts that a non-exploration show could work, and being displeased with early concepts presented to him in 1991.
However, Rick Berman stated in the "" that Roddenberry had given him his blessing for developing it close to his death.
At Shore Leave 14 in July 1992, Majel Barrett commented on Roddenberry's involvement, saying: "He knew about it, but he was not about to become involved.
He had done what he wanted to do and that was it.
He just wished them Godspeed and go ahead.
And as long as the name "Star Trek" is on it, yes, the estate will have a part of the action."
Ronald D. Moore, one of the show's main writers (who previously wrote for "" and went on to create the re-imagined "Battlestar Galactica"), praised the show as the "ultimate achievement for the ["Star Trek"] franchise" in 2002:
I think "Deep Space [Nine]" was the show that really took "Star Trek" as far as you could take it.
You have the original series which is a sort of a landmark, it changes everything about the way science fiction is presented on television, at least space-based science fiction.
Then you have "Next Generation" which, for all of its legitimate achievements is still a riff on the original.
It's still sort of like, ok, it's another star ship and it's another captain – it's different but it's still a riff on the original.
Here comes "Deep Space [Nine]" and it just runs the table in a different way.
It just says ok, you think you know what "Star Trek" is, let's put it on a space station, and let's make it darker.
Let's make it a continuing story, and let's continually challenge your assumptions about what this American icon means.
And I think it was the ultimate achievement for the franchise.
Personally, I think it's the best of all of them, I think it's an amazing piece of work.
========,2,Multimedia.
========,3,Music.
On June 30, 1993, between seasons one and two, "DS9" followed the example of other "Star Trek" series in releasing the original score from its pilot episode on CD.
The title theme was also made available as a CD single.
Music from several other episodes is included on "The Best of Star Trek" releases.
Originally created in the hope that Frank Sinatra, Jr. would take the role, the character Vic Fontaine (instead played by 1960s heart throb James Darren) was introduced in the sixth-season episode "His Way".
The character was a self-aware holographic Las Vegas lounge singer and night club owner from the early 1960s.
Vic was popular with the station's crew and performed many period songs by, among others, Frank Sinatra and Nat King Cole.
Darren's role allowed him to release "This One's from the Heart" on August 24, 1999, featuring songs that Vic sang in the show and other period pieces.
On February 12, 2013, La La Land Records released a limited edition, four-disc soundtrack collection entitled the "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Collection".
The discs contain various cues from episodes scored by Dennis McCarthy, Jay Chattaway, David Bell, Paul Baillargeon, John Debney, Richard Bellis and Gregory Smith.
Only 3000 copies of the collection were printed.
========,3,VHS, Laserdisc and DVD releases.
Episodes of "DS9" were made available on VHS cassettes.
The series was released on VHS in the UK starting August 2, 1993.
Each video cassette contained two episodes and unique artwork and character/plot information.
The first VHS release in the United States came on November 19, 1996.
Beginning in 1996, "DS9" began releases on LaserDisc.
Picture and sound quality in this format was significantly better than that of VHS cassettes; however, the Laserdisc format was discontinued in 1997.
Only 30 discs, or the first 60 episodes, were released, comprising the first, second and part of the third season before Pioneer halted its production of Star Trek laserdiscs in October 1999.
DS9 LaserDiscs were also produced for the Japanese and European markets.
In Japan, the first five seasons were released in a series of ten boxed sets (two per season) before they were canceled around the same time as the US releases.
In Europe, a select few DS9 episodes were released on PAL laserdisc: "Emissary", also included in the boxed set "Star Trek: The Pilots"; "The Way of the Warrior", parts 1 and 2; and "Trials and Tribble-ations" from DS9, "The Trouble with Tribbles" from "Star Trek: The Original Series", and "More Tribbles, More Troubles" from "Star Trek: The Animated Series".
Following the DVD release of "Star Trek: The Next Generation" in 2002, "DS9" was released on DVD beginning in February 2003.
"DS9" was released in boxed sets of one season each which were released approximately one month apart.
Each season contains several "special features", including a biographical look at a main character, information from make-up designer Michael Westmore on how various aliens were created, and interviews with cast members and crew members.
The sets also include "Section 31" easter eggs that give a brief look at other aspects of the show.
The Region 2 and 4 DVDs also come with bonus CD-ROM discs that allow users to build a "virtual" "DS9" on their computer with each release (this software can no longer be installed as the on-line registration is no longer available).
On October 26, 2004, a boxed set of all seven season sets was also released.
========,3,Documentary project.
In 2017, Ira Steven Behr announced he had reconvened much of the former cast and crew of "Deep Space Nine" for a documentary film entitled "What We Left Behind".
As of February 2017, the documentary was partially finished, according to Behr, with an Indiegogo fundraising page set up to crowdsource the rest of the money needed to complete it.
In addition to interviews with cast and crew, the documentary will explore "Deep Space Nine"'s legacy; Behr also reconvened the show's old writers' room to develop a script for the first episode of an imagined eighth season, which will be featured in the film.
A tentative release date has been set for February 2018.
The fundraiser surpassed its target of nearly $150,000 within a day of going live.
========,2,Books.
Pocket Books has published several dozen books based on "DS9".
Some of these were novelizations of memorable episodes, such as ", " and "What You Leave Behind", which were usually published a few days after the episode aired in the United States.
Several novels were part of "crossover" series between the "Star Trek" franchises, while others were part of other franchises but dealt with events laid out in "DS9".
For example, "The Battle of Betazed" tells of how Deanna Troi attempted to resist the Dominion occupation of her world (mentioned in the episode "In the Pale Moonlight").
Most focus on the station and its crew, with a notable exception being Ira Steven Behr and Robert Hewitt Wolfe’s "Legends of the Ferengi".
The "Millennium" series by Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens, published by Pocket Books beginning in 2000, consists of "The Fall of Terok Nor" (book 1), "The War of the Prophets" (book 2), and" Inferno" (book 3).
The series lays out an alternate ending to "DS9" (the novels were actually written before the series concluded) in which a second wormhole is created by the actions of a number of shady characters, destroying the station.
In the space-time distortion that occurs, most of the crew are transported 25 years into the future—a future in which the Federation and its allies are virtually crushed and a fanatical sect of Bajorans who worships the Pah-wraiths have ascended to power and plan to destroy the universe to bring about a higher state of existence.
"Inferno" ends the series as an unexpected mode of time travel is discovered "after" the end of the universe, allowing the "DS9" crew to alter past events.
"Avatar", a two-part novel published on May 1, 2001, picked up where the series left off.
It began of "DS9", into which "A Stitch in Time" (a biographical look at the life of Garak, written by Andrew Robinson himself) was incorporated retroactively.
The events of "What You Leave Behind", "DS9"’s series finale, caused some radical changes to occur in Season 8.
As Benjamin Sisko had entered the Celestial Temple, Colonel Kira was given command of the station while a new commander named Elias Vaughn took over her position, Garak became the leader of post-war Cardassia, Odo helped the Changelings rebuild, and Rom presided over the Ferengi Alliance.
Other publications, such as the "Deep Space Nine Technical Manual" and "", are common to most of the "Trek" series.
The "DS9" Companion contains detailed episode guides and interviews with actors, writers, directors and other staff members.
"DS9" series influences were included in role-playing game reference books from Last Unicorn Games and Decipher.
Additionally, several novels have also been released in audio form, narrated by Rene Auberjonois and Armin Shimerman among others.
========,3,Comics.
Outside its line of novels, "DS9" has been the subject of several comic books published by Malibu Comics, Wildstorm Comics, Marvel Comics and IDW.
One comic is a spin-off, detailing Nog’s experiences at the Starfleet Academy.
Another "DS9" comic book series became an exceptional example of licensed "Star Trek" works influencing each other, as a major character from Wildstorm's "N-Vector", Tiris Jast, appeared in the "Avatar, Part I" novel.
========,2,Games.
Several video games focusing on "DS9" have been released.
The first was "", a 1995 side-scrolling game released for the Super NES and Genesis.
The game takes place around the time of the series premiere, borrowing some stories from early episodes such as "Past Prologue" and creating others.
A number of problems reportedly impeded the game's development process, and it met with mixed reactions.
Three "DS9"-themed games were released for the PC: ' in 1996, ' in 2000, and "" in 2001.
A board game was released as part of the now-defunct "component board game" series, which included an intercompatible board game for "Star Trek: The Next Generation".
"DS9"s role-playing book was one of several that failed to be released into wide circulation when Decipher, then publisher of the "Star Trek" role-playing game, discontinued its line.
The series features prominently in the "Star Trek Customizable Card Game", particularly its second edition.
In the game's first edition, "Deep Space Nine" is the titular fifth set, followed by one entitled "The Dominion" and several other "DS9"-themed sets.
In the second edition, there are two types of cards for the United Federation of Planets, which may be placed at Earth or Deep Space Nine.
The Ferengi, Dominion, Cardassian, Bajoran, and Maquis affiliations are primarily "DS9"-derived material, while the Klingon affiliation also borrows strongly from it.
The PC game "Star Trek Online" features Deep Space Nine as a trading hub.
The lower ring (The Promenade) contains vendors, and the upper ring offers views of surrounding space.
========,2,Other merchandising.
Along with the rest of the "Star Trek" franchise, "DS9" has been the subject of much merchandizing.
Action figures, keychains, models, and other items have been released.
The station itself, which is highly recognizable and iconic of the series, is the subject of many of these items.
Paramount also sells Starfleet uniforms; among the styles is the so-called ""DS9"-style" uniform, which is primarily black with a division color (red for command, yellow for engineering or security, blue/green for medical and the sciences) on the shoulders and a grayish-purple undershirt is seen underneath the uniform.
"DS9" was represented at , an attraction at the Las Vegas Hilton which recreated both Quark’s Bar & Restaurant and the Promenade.
The former served "Star Trek"-style food and drinks, and hosted gatherings such as conventions.
The latter (called the Shopping Promenade) sold various souvenirs; among the items for sale were "official" Starfleet uniforms and action figures.
The attraction closed in September 2008.
