========,1,preface.
Jana Gana Mana is the national anthem of India.
It is the Hindi version of a song originally composed in Bengali by poet Rabindranath Tagore.
The song was adopted in its Hindi version by the Constituent Assembly of India as the National Anthem on 24 January 1950.
A formal rendition of the national anthem takes approximately fifty-two seconds.
A shortened version consisting of the first and last lines (and taking about 20 seconds to play) is also staged occasionally.
Earlier, it was first publicly sung on 27 December 1911 at the Calcutta (now, Kolkata) Session of the Indian National Congress.
The Bengali version is the first of five stanzas of Tagore's song "Bharot Bhagyo Bidhata".
========,2,Lyrics.
The poem is written in a literary register of the Bengali language called sadhu bhasa.
The song has been written almost entirely using nouns that also can function as verbs.
Most of the nouns of the song are in use in all major languages in India.
Therefore, the original song is quite clearly understandable, and in fact, remains almost unchanged in several widely different Indian languages.
The transcription below reflects the Bengali pronunciation, in both the Bengali script and romanisation.
========,2,English Translation.
You are the ruler (directing the nation for farewell) of the hearts of all people, Dispenser of India's fortune.
Thy name rouses the hearts of the  Punjab, Sindh, Gujarat, and Maratha, Of the Dravida, and Odisha and Bengal.
It echoes in the hills of Vindhyas and, Himalayas, mingles in the music of the Yamuna and the Ganga and is chanted by the waves of the Indian Sea.
We pray for your blessings, and sing by your praise, The saving of all people waits in thy hand.
You are the dispenser of India's fortune, Victory, victory, victory to thee.
========,2,History.
Jana Gana Mana was sung on 27 December 1911 at the Indian National Congress, Calcutta and again in January 1912 at the annual event of the Adi Brahmo Samaj.
Though the Bengali song had been written in 1911, it was largely unknown except to the readers of the Adi Brahmo Samaj journal, "Tattwabodhini Patrika", of which Tagore was the editor.
========,2,Code of conduct.
The National Anthem of India is played or sung on various occasions.
Instructions have been issued from time to time about the correct versions of the Anthem, the occasions on which these are to be played or sung, and about the need for paying respect to the anthem by observance of proper decorum on such occasions.
The substance of these instructions has been embodied in the information sheet issued by the government of India for general information and guidance.
The approximate duration of the National Anthem of India is 52 seconds.
========,2,Controversies.
In Kerala, students belonging to the Jehovah's Witnesses religious denomination were expelled by school authorities for their refusal to sing the national anthem on religious grounds, although they stood up respectfully when the anthem was sung.
The Kerala High Court concluded that there was nothing in it which could offend anyone's religious susceptibilities, and upheld their expulsion.
The Supreme Court reversed the High Court and ruled that the High Court had misdirected itself because the question is not whether a particular religious belief or practice appeals to our reason or sentiment but whether the belief is genuinely and conscientiously held as part of the profession or practice of a religion.
"Our personal views and reactions are irrelevant" The Supreme Court affirmed the principle that it is not for a secular judge to sit in judgment on the correctness of a religious belief.
Supreme Court observed in its ruling On 30 November 2016, Supreme Court of India ordered National Anthem must be played before movies in theaters, in order to instill "committed patriotism and nationalism".
On February 10, 2017, 2 Kashmiris were booked for not standing during anthem in Jammu Cinema, under provisions of the Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971.
This was the first arrest of its kind made by a state government in India.
========,3,Historical significance.
This poem was composed in December 1911, coinciding with the visit of King George V at the time of the Coronation Durbar of George V, and "Bharat Bhagya Bidhata" and "Adhinayaka" was believed to be in praise of King George V as per the British newspapers.The poem is created in 'shankarabharana' rag.The composition was first sung during a convention of the then loyalist Indian National Congress in Calcutta on 27 December 1911.
It was sung on the second day of the convention, and the agenda of that day devoted itself to a loyal welcome of George V on his visit to India.
The event was reported thus in the British Indian press:
"The Bengali poet Rabindranath Tagore sang a song composed by him specially to welcome the Emperor."
("Statesman", Dec. 28, 1911) <br>"The proceedings began with the singing by Rabindranath Tagore of a song specially composed by him in honour of the Emperor."
("Englishman", Dec. 28, 1911)<br>"When the proceedings of the Indian National Congress began on Wednesday 27th December 1911, a Bengali song in welcome of the Emperor was sung.
A resolution welcoming the Emperor and Empress was also adopted unanimously."
("Indian", Dec. 29, 1911)
========,4,Counter arguments.
Many historians aver that the newspaper reports cited above were misguided.
The confusion arose in British Indian press since a different song, "Badshah Humara" written in Hindi by Rambhuj Chaudhary, was sung on the same occasion in praise of the monarch.
The nationalist Indian press stated this difference of events clearly:
"The proceedings of the Congress party session started with a prayer in Bengali to praise God (song of benediction).
This was followed by a resolution expressing loyalty to King George V. Then another song was sung welcoming King George V." ("Amrita Bazar Patrika", Dec.28,1911)<br>
Even the report of the annual session of the Indian National Congress of December 1911 stated this difference:
"On the first day of 28th annual session of the Congress, proceedings started after singing Vande Mataram.
On the second day the work began after singing a patriotic song by Babu Ravindranath Tagore.
Messages from well wishers were then read and a resolution was passed expressing loyalty to King George V. Afterwards the song composed for welcoming King George V and Queen Mary was sung."
On 10 November 1937 Tagore wrote a letter to Mr Pulin Bihari Sen about the controversy.
That letter in Bengali can be found in Tagore's biography" Ravindrajivani, volume II page 339" by "Prabhatkumar Mukherjee".
Again in his letter of 19 March 1939 Tagore writes:
"I should only insult myself if I cared to answer those who consider me capable of such unbounded stupidity as to sing in praise of George the Fourth or George the Fifth as the Eternal Charioteer leading the pilgrims on their journey through countless ages of the timeless history of mankind."
"(Purvasa, Phalgun, 1354, p.
Moreover, Tagore was hailed as a patriot who wrote other songs too apart from "Jana Gana Mana" lionising the Indian independence movement.
He renounced his knighthood in protest against the 1919 Jallianwala Bagh Massacre.
The Knighthood (i.e.
the title of 'Sir') was conferred on him by the same King George V after receiving the Nobel Prize in Literature for "Gitanjali" from the government of Sweden.
Two of Tagore's more politically charged compositions, "Chitto Jetha Bhayshunyo" ("Where the Mind is Without Fear", Gitanjali Poem #35) and "Ekla Chalo Re" ("If They Answer Not to Thy Call, Walk Alone"), gained mass appeal, with the latter favoured by Gandhi and Netaji.
========,3,Regional aspects.
Another controversy is that only those provinces that were under British rule, i.e.
Punjab, Sindh, Gujarat, Maratha, Dravid (South India), Odisha and Bengal, were mentioned.
None of the princely states – Kashmir, Rajasthan, Hyderabad, Mysore or Kerala – or the states in Northeast India, which are now integral parts of India were mentioned.
But opponents of this proposition claim that Tagore mentioned only the border states of India to include complete India.
Whether the princely states would form a part of a liberated Indian republic was a matter of debate even till Indian Independence.
'Dravida' includes the people from the south (though Dravida specifically means Tamil and even then, the same consideration is not given for the south since there are many distinct people whereas in the north each of the distinct people are named) and 'Jolodhi' (Stanza 1) is Sanskrit for "seas and oceans".
Even North-East which was under British rule or holy rivers apart from Ganges and Yamuna are not mentioned to keep the song in its rhythm.
India has 29 states, 7 union territories.
In 2005, there were calls to delete the word "Sindh" and substitute it with the word Kashmir.
The argument was that Sindh was no longer a part of India, having become part of Pakistan as a result of the Partition of 1947.
Opponents of this proposal hold that the word "Sindh" refers to the Indus and to Sindhi culture, and that Sindhi people are an integral part of India's cultural fabric.
The Supreme Court of India declined to change the national anthem and the wording remains unchanged.
On 17 December 2013, MLA of Assam, Phani bhushan Choudhury cited article of 'The Times of India' published on 26 January 1950, stating that in the originally the word 'Kamarup' was included in the song, but was later changed to 'Sindhu' and claimed that Kamarup should be re-included.
To this, the then minister Rockybul Hussain replied that the state government would initiate steps in this regard after response from the newspaper.
The debate was further joined by the then minister Ardhendu Dey, mentioning 'Sanchayita' (edited by Tagore himself) etc.
where he said Kamrup was not mentioned.
On 7 July 2015, Rajasthan Governor, Kalyan Singh has called for replacing the word Adhinayaka with the word Mangal, basing his argument on the myth Tagore himself busted back in 1939 itself.
